

Wikipedia The Free Encyclopedia

    Donate
    Create account
    Log in

Contents
(Top)
Indigenous inhabitants

European colonization (1075–1754)

Revolutionary period (1754–1793)

Early republic (1793–1830)

Expansion and reform (1830–1848)

Civil War and Reconstruction (1848–1877)

Gilded Age and the Progressive Era (1877–1914)

Modern America and World Wars (1914–1945)

Cold War (1945–1991)

Contemporary United States (1991–present)

See also

    Notes
    References
    Sources
    External links

History of the United States

    Article
    Talk

    Read
    View source
    View history

Tools

Appearance
Text

    Small
    Standard
    Large

Width

    Standard
    Wide

Color (beta)

    Automatic
    Light
    Dark

Checked
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"American history" redirects here. For the history of the continents, see History of the Americas.
Current territories of the United States after the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands were given independence in October 1994
This article is part of a series on the
History of the
United States
Timeline and periods
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Topics

Groups

Places

    Outline List of years Historiography

    Category Portal

    vte

The land which became the United States was inhabited by Native Americans for tens of thousands of years; their descendants include but may not be limited to 574 federally recognized tribes. The history of the present-day United States began in 1607 with the establishment of Jamestown in modern-day Virginia by settlers who arrived from the Kingdom of England, and the landing of the Mayflower by English pilgrims to Plymouth in 1620. In the late 15th century, European colonization began and largely decimated Indigenous societies through wars and epidemics. By the 1760s, the Thirteen Colonies, then part of British America and the Kingdom of Great Britain, were established. The Southern Colonies built an agricultural system on slave labor and enslaving millions from Africa. After the British victory over the Kingdom of France in the French and Indian Wars, Parliament imposed a series of taxes and issued the Intolerable Acts on the colonies in 1773, which were designed to end self-governance. Tensions between the colonies and British authorities subsequently intensified, leading to the Revolutionary War, which commenced with the Battles of Lexington and Concord on April 19, 1775. In June 1775, the Second Continental Congress established the Continental Army and unanimously selected George Washington as its commander-in-chief. The following year, on July 4, 1776, the Second Continental Congress unanimously declared its independence, issuing the Declaration of Independence. On September 3, 1783, in the Treaty of Paris, the British acknowledged the independence and sovereignty of the Thirteen Colonies, leading to the establishment of the United States. On September 17, 1787, the U.S. Constitution was signed by a majority of delegates, and was later ratified by the Thirteen Colonies, leading to first modern U.S. government.

In the 1788-89 presidential election, Washington was elected the nation's first U.S. president. Along with his Treasury Secretary, Alexander Hamilton, Washington sought to create a relatively stronger central government than that favored by other founders, including Thomas Jefferson and James Madison. On March 4, 1789, the new nation debated, adopted, and ratified the U.S. Constitution, which is now the oldest and longest-standing written and codified national constitution in the world.[1] In 1791, a Bill of Rights was added to guarantee inalienable rights. In 1803, Jefferson, then serving as the nation's third president, negotiated the Louisiana Purchase, which doubled the size of the country. Encouraged by available, inexpensive land, and the notion of manifest destiny, the country expanded to the Pacific Coast underwent westward expansion in a project of settler colonialism marked by a series of conflicts with the continent's indigenous inhabitants. The most notable advocate of manifest destiny was President James K. Polk, who annexed Texas in 1845, and declared war on Mexico the next year. An overwhelming U.S. victory in the Mexican-American War led to the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848, where the U.S. acquired much of the American Southwest from Mexico. Whether or not slavery should be legal in the expanded territories was an issue of national contention, and led to increasing tensions over slavery.

Following the election of Abraham Lincoln as the nation's 16th president in the 1860 presidential election, southern states seceded and formed the pro-slavery Confederate States of America. In April 1861, at the Battle of Fort Sumter, Confederates launched the Civil War. However, the Union's victory at the Battle of Gettysburg, the deadliest battle in American military history with over 50,000 casualties, proved a turning point in the war, leading to the Union's victory in 1865, which preserved the nation. On April 15, 1865, Lincoln was assassinated. The Confederates' defeat led to the abolition of slavery. In the subsequent Reconstruction era from 1865 to 1877, the national government gained explicit duty to protect individual rights. In 1877, white southern Democrats regained political power in the South, often using paramilitary suppression of voting and Jim Crow laws to maintain white supremacy. During the Gilded Age from the late 19th century to the early 20th century, the United States emerged as the world's leading industrial power, largely due to entrepreneurship, industrialization, and the arrival of millions of immigrant workers. Dissatisfaction with corruption, inefficiency, and traditional politics stimulated the Progressive movement, leading to reforms, including to the federal income tax, direct election of U.S. Senators, citizenship for many Indigenous people, alcohol prohibition, and women's suffrage.

Initially neutral during World War I, the United States declared war on Germany in 1917, joining the successful Allies. After the prosperous Roaring Twenties, the Wall Street crash of 1929 marked the onset of a decade-long global Great Depression. President Franklin D. Roosevelt launched New Deal programs, including unemployment relief and Social Security.[2] Following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, the United States entered World War II, helping defeat Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy in the European theater and, in the Pacific War, defeating Imperial Japan after using nuclear weapons on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945. The war led to the U.S. occupation of Japan and the Allied-occupied Germany.

Following the end of World War II, the Cold War commenced with the United States and the Soviet Union emerging as superpower rivals; the two countries largely confronted each other indirectly in the arms race, the Space Race, propaganda campaigns, and proxy wars, which included the Korean War and the Vietnam War. In the 1960s, due largely to the civil rights movement, social reforms enforced African Americans' constitutional rights of voting and freedom of movement. In 1991, the United States led a coalition and invaded Iraq during the Gulf War. Later in the year, the Cold War ended with the dissolution of the Soviet Union, leaving the United States as the world's sole superpower.

In the post-Cold War era, the United States has been drawn into conflicts in the Middle East, especially following the September 11 attacks, with the start of the War on Terror. In the 21st century, the country was negatively impacted by the Great Recession of 2007 to 2009 and the COVID-19 pandemic of 2020 to 2023. Recently, the U.S. withdrew from the war in Afghanistan, intervened in the Russian invasion of Ukraine, and became militarily involved in the Middle Eastern crisis, which included the Red Sea crisis, a military conflict between the U.S., and the Houthi movement in Yemen, and the American bombing of Iran during the Iran–Israel war.
Indigenous inhabitants
Main articles: Geological history of North America, History of Native Americans in the United States, and Pre-Columbian era
See also: Native Americans in the United States
Approximate location of the ice-free corridor and specific Paleoindian sites, according to the Clovis theory

It is not definitively known how or when Native Americans first settled the Americas. The prevailing theory proposes that people from Eurasia followed game across Beringia, a land bridge that connected Siberia to present-day Alaska during the Ice Age, and then spread southward, perhaps as early as 30,000 years ago.[3] These early inhabitants, called Paleo-Indians, soon diversified into hundreds of culturally distinct groups.
Paleo-Indians
Main article: Pre-Columbian North America
The cultural areas of pre-Columbian North America, according to Alfred Kroeber

By 10,000 BCE, humans had already been well-established throughout North America. Originally, Paleo-Indians hunted Ice Age megafauna like mammoths, but as they began to go extinct, people turned instead to bison as a food source, and later foraging for berries and seeds. Paleo-Indians in central Mexico were the first in the Americas to farm, around 8,000 BCE. Eventually, the knowledge began to spread northward. By 3,000 BCE, corn was being grown in the valleys of Arizona and New Mexico, followed by primitive irrigation systems and, by 300 BCE, early villages of the Hohokam.[4][5]

One of the earlier cultures in the present-day United States was the Clovis culture (9,100 to 8,850 BCE), who are primarily identified by the use of fluted spear points called the Clovis point. The Folsom culture was similar, but is marked by the use of the Folsom point.

A later migration around 8,000 BCE included Na-Dene-speaking peoples, who reached the Pacific Northwest by 5,000 BCE.[6] From there, they migrated along the Pacific Coast and into the interior.[7] Another group, the Oshara tradition people, who lived from 5,500 BCE to 600 CE, were part of the Archaic Southwest.
Mound builders and pueblos
Main articles: Mound Builders and Ancestral Puebloans
Monks Mound of Cahokia, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, in summer

The Adena began constructing large earthwork mounds around 600 BCE. They are the earliest known people to have been Mound Builders, although there are mounds in the United States that predate this culture. The Adenans were absorbed into the Hopewell tradition, a powerful people who traded tools and goods across a wide territory. They continued the Adena tradition of mound-building and pioneered a trading system called the Hopewell Exchange System, which at its greatest extent ran from the present-day Southeast up to the Canadian side of Lake Ontario.[8] By 500 CE, the Hopewellians had been absorbed into the larger Mississippian culture.

The Mississippians were a broad group of tribes. Their most important city was Cahokia, near modern-day St. Louis, Missouri. At its peak in the 12th century, the city had an estimated population of 20,000, larger than the population of London at the time. The entire city was centered around the Monks Mound that stood 100 feet (30 m) tall. Cahokia, like many other cities and villages of the time, depended on hunting, foraging, trading, and agriculture, and developed a class system with slaves and human sacrifice that was influenced by societies to the south, like the Mayans.[4]

In the Southwest, the Anasazi began constructing stone and adobe pueblos around 900 BCE.[9] These apartment-like structures were often built into cliff faces, as seen in the Cliff Palace at Mesa Verde. Some grew to be the size of cities, with Pueblo Bonito along the Chaco River in New Mexico once consisting of 800 rooms.[4]
Northwest and northeast
Main articles: Indigenous peoples of the Eastern Woodlands and Indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast
The K'alyaan Totem pole of the Tlingit Kiks.ádi Clan, erected at Sitka National Historical Park to commemorate the lives lost in the Battle of Sitka in 1804

The Indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest were likely the most affluent Native Americans. Many distinct cultural groups and political entities developed there, but they all shared certain beliefs, traditions, and practices, such as the centrality of salmon as a resource and spiritual symbol. Permanent villages began to develop in this region as early as 1,000 BCE, and these communities celebrated by the gift-giving feast of the potlatch.

In present-day upstate New York, the Iroquois formed a confederacy of tribal peoples in the mid-15th century, consisting of the Oneida, Mohawk, Onondaga, Cayuga, and Seneca.[10][11][12] Each tribe was represented in a group of 50 sachem chiefs. It has been suggested that their culture contributed to political thinking during the development of the United States government.[citation needed] The Iroquois were powerful, waging war with many neighboring tribes, and later, Europeans. As their territory expanded, smaller tribes were forced further west, including the Osage, Kaw, Ponca, and Omaha peoples.[12][13]
Native Hawaiians
Main articles: Ancient Hawaii and Hawaiian Kingdom

The exact date for the settling of Hawaii is disputed but the first settlement most likely took place between 940 and 1130 CE.[14] Around 1200 CE, Tahitian explorers found and began settling the area. This marked the rise of the Hawaiian civilization, which would be largely separated from the rest of the world until the arrival of the British 600 years later.[15][16][17] Europeans under the British explorer James Cook arrived in the Hawaiian Islands in 1778, and within five years of contact, European military technology would help Kamehameha I conquer most of the island group, and eventually unify the islands for the first time, establishing the Hawaiian Kingdom.[18]
Puerto Rico
Main articles: History of Puerto Rico and Taino

The island of Puerto Rico has been settled for at least 4,000 years. Starting with the Ortoiroid culture, successive generations of native migrations arrived replacing or absorbing local populations. By the year 1000 Arawak people had arrived from South America via the Lesser Antilles; these settlers would become the Taíno encountered by the Spanish in 1493. Upon European contact a native population between 30,000 and 60,000 was likely, led by a single chief called a Cacique.[19] Colonization resulted in the decimation of the local inhabitants due to the harsh Encomienda system and epidemics caused by Old World diseases. Puerto Rico would remain a part of Spain until American annexation in 1898.[19]
European colonization (1075–1754)
Main article: Colonial history of the United States
Norse exploration
Main article: Norse colonization of North America

The earliest recorded European mention of America is in a treatise by the medieval chronicler Adam of Bremen, circa 1075, where it is referred to as Vinland.[a] It is also extensively referred to in the Norse Vinland sagas. The strongest archaeological evidence of the existence of Norse settlements in America is located in Canada; there is significant scholarly debate as to whether Norse explorers also made landfall in New England.[21]
Early settlements
Main article: European colonization of the Americas
The Mayflower in Plymouth Harbor. Fluyts, caravels, and carracks brought Europeans to the Americas.

Europeans brought horses, cattle, and hogs to the Americas and took back maize, turkeys, tomatoes, potatoes, tobacco, beans, and squash to Europe. Many explorers and early settlers died after being exposed to new diseases in the Americas. However, the effects of new Eurasian diseases carried by the colonists, especially smallpox and measles, were much worse for the Native Americans, as they had no immunity to them. They suffered epidemics and died in very large numbers, usually before large-scale European settlement began. Their societies were disrupted by the scale of deaths.[22][23]
Spanish contact
Main articles: Spanish Florida, Santa Fe de Nuevo México, and Spanish Texas
See also: Spanish colonization of the Americas and New Spain

Spanish explorers were the first Europeans, after the Norse, to reach the present-day United States, after the voyages of Christopher Columbus (beginning in 1492) established possessions in the Caribbean, including the modern-day U.S. territories of Puerto Rico, and parts of the U.S. Virgin Islands. Juan Ponce de León landed in Florida in 1513.[24] Spanish expeditions quickly reached the Appalachian Mountains, the Mississippi River, the Grand Canyon,[25] and the Great Plains.[26]

In 1539, Hernando de Soto extensively explored the Southeast,[26] and a year later Francisco Coronado explored from Arizona to central Kansas in search of gold.[26] Escaped horses from Coronado's party spread over the Great Plains, and the Plains Indians mastered horsemanship within a few generations.[4] Small Spanish settlements eventually grew to become important cities, such as San Antonio, Albuquerque, Tucson, Los Angeles, and San Francisco.[27]
Dutch mid-Atlantic
Main article: New Netherland
See also: Dutch colonization of the Americas

The Dutch East India Company sent explorer Henry Hudson to search for a Northwest Passage to Asia in 1609. New Netherland was established in 1621 by the company to capitalize on the North American fur trade. Growth was slow at first due to mismanagement by the Dutch and Native American conflicts. After the Dutch purchased the island of Manhattan from the Native Americans, the land was named New Amsterdam and became the capital of New Netherland. The town rapidly expanded and in the mid-1600s it became an important trading center. Despite being Calvinists and building the Reformed Church in America, the Dutch were tolerant of other religions and cultures and traded with the Iroquois to the north.[28]

The colony served as a barrier to British expansion from New England, and as a result a series of wars were fought. The colony was taken over by Britain as New York in 1664 and its capital was renamed New York City.
Swedish settlement
Main article: New Sweden
C. A. Nothnagle Log House in Gibbstown, New Jersey, the oldest wooden building in the United States

In the early years of the Swedish Empire, Swedish, Dutch, and German stockholders formed the New Sweden Company to trade furs and tobacco in North America. The company's first expedition was led by Peter Minuit, who had been governor of New Netherland from 1626 to 1631, and landed in Delaware Bay in March 1638. The settlers founded Fort Christina at the site of modern-day Wilmington, Delaware, and made treaties with Indigenous peoples for land ownership on both sides of the Delaware River.[29][30]

Over the following seventeen years, 12 more expeditions brought settlers from the Swedish Empire to New Sweden. The colony established 19 permanent settlements along with many farms, extending into modern-day Maryland, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey. It was incorporated into New Netherland in 1655 after a Dutch invasion from the neighboring New Netherland colony during the Second Northern War.[29][30]
French
Main articles: French Florida, Canada (New France), Louisiana (New France), Illinois Country, and Ohio Country
See also: French colonization of the Americas and New France
The San Pablo Bastion of the Castillo de San Marcos, completed in 1683, in St. Augustine, Florida

Giovanni da Verrazzano landed in North Carolina in 1524, and was the first European to sail into New York Harbor and Narragansett Bay. In the 1540s, French Huguenots settled at Fort Caroline near present-day Jacksonville, Florida. In 1565, Spanish forces led by Pedro Menéndez destroyed the settlement and established the first Spanish settlement in what would become the United States — St. Augustine.

Most French lived in Quebec and Acadia (modern Canada), but far-reaching trade relationships with Native Americans spread their influence. French colonists in small villages along the Mississippi and Illinois rivers lived in farming communities that served as a grain source for Gulf Coast settlements. The French established plantations in Louisiana along with settling New Orleans, Mobile, and Biloxi.
British colonies
Further information: British colonization of the Americas and British North America

The English, drawn in by Francis Drake's raids on Spanish treasure ships leaving the New World, settled the strip of land along the east coast in the 1600s.[4] The early British colonies were established by private groups seeking profit, and were marked by starvation, disease, and Native American attacks. Many immigrants were people seeking religious freedom or escaping political oppression, peasants displaced by the Industrial Revolution, or those simply seeking adventure and opportunity. Between the late 1610s and the Revolution, the British shipped an estimated 50,000 to 120,000 convicts to their American colonies.[31]

In some areas, Native Americans taught colonists how to grow local crops. In others, they attacked the settlers. Virgin forests provided an ample supply of building material and firewood. Natural inlets and harbors lined the coast, providing easy ports for essential trade with Europe. Settlements remained close to the coast due to this as well as Native American resistance and the Appalachian Mountains in the interior.[4]
First settlement in Jamestown
Main articles: Jamestown, Virginia and Colony of Virginia
Following the Indian massacre of Jamestown settlers in 1622, colonists in Virginia feared all natives as enemies.

The first successful English colony, Jamestown, was established by the Virginia Company in 1607 on the James River in Virginia. The colonists were preoccupied with the search for gold and were ill-equipped for life in the New World. Captain John Smith held the fledgling Jamestown together in the first year, and the colony descended into anarchy and nearly failed when he returned to England two years later. John Rolfe began experimenting with tobacco from the West Indies in 1612, and by 1614 the first shipment arrived in London. It became Virginia's chief source of revenue within a decade.

In 1624, after years of disease and Indian attacks, including the Powhatan attack of 1622, King James I revoked the Virginia Company's charter and made Virginia a royal colony.
New England Colonies
Main articles: New England Colonies and Puritan migration to New England (1620–1640)

New England was initially settled primarily by Puritans fleeing religious persecution. The Pilgrims sailed for Virginia on the Mayflower in 1620, but were knocked off course by a storm and landed at Plymouth, where they agreed to a social contract of rules in the Mayflower Compact. About half died in the first winter.[32] Like Jamestown, Plymouth suffered from disease and starvation, but local Wampanoag Indians taught the colonists how to farm maize.

Plymouth was followed by the Puritans and Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1630. They maintained a charter for self-government separate from England, and elected founder John Winthrop as governor. Roger Williams opposed Winthrop's treatment of Native Americans and religious intolerance, and established the colony of Providence Plantations, later Rhode Island, on the basis of freedom of religion. Other colonists established settlements in the Connecticut River Valley, and on the coasts of present-day New Hampshire and Maine. Native American attacks continued, with the most significant occurring in the 1637 Pequot War and the 1675 King Philip's War.

New England became a center of commerce and industry due to the poor, mountainous soil making agriculture difficult. Rivers were harnessed to power grain mills and sawmills, and the numerous harbors facilitated trade. Tight-knit villages developed around these industrial centers, and Boston became one of America's most important ports.
Middle Colonies
Main article: Middle Colonies
Treaty of Penn with the Indians, a portrait depicting William Penn signing the Treaty of Shackamaxona with Lenape Indians in the Province of Pennsylvania in 1682 by Benjamin West

In the 1660s, the Middle Colonies of New York, New Jersey, and Delaware were established in the former Dutch New Netherland, and were characterized by a large degree of ethnic and religious diversity. At the same time, the Iroquois of New York, strengthened by years of fur trading with Europeans, formed the powerful Iroquois Confederacy.

The last colony in this region was Pennsylvania, established in 1681 by William Penn as a home for religious dissenters, including Quakers, Methodists, and the Amish.[33] The capital of the colony, Philadelphia, became a dominant commercial center in a few short years. While Quakers populated the city, German immigrants began to flood into the Pennsylvanian hills and forests, while the Scots-Irish pushed into the far western frontier.
Southern Colonies
Main article: Southern Colonies
The Old Plantation, a portrait depicting a plantation in South Carolina in approximately 1790 with Gullah slaves playing traditional West Africa instruments resisting forced assimilation from the planation culture.

The overwhelmingly rural Southern Colonies contrasted sharply with the New England and Middle Colonies. After Virginia, the second British colony south of New England was Maryland, established as a Catholic haven in 1632. The economy of these two colonies was built entirely on yeoman farmers and planters. The planters established themselves in the Tidewater region of Virginia, establishing massive plantations with slave labor.

In 1670, the Province of Carolina was established, and Charleston became the region's great trading port. While Virginia's economy was also based on tobacco, Carolina was more diversified, exporting rice, indigo, and lumber as well. In 1712, it was divided in two, creating North and South Carolina. The Georgia Colony was established by James Oglethorpe in 1732 as a border to Spanish Florida and a reform colony for former prisoners and the poor.[33]
Religion
Main article: History of religion in the United States

Religiosity expanded greatly after the First Great Awakening, a religious revival in the 1740s led by preachers such as Jonathan Edwards and George Whitefield. American Evangelicals affected by the Awakening added a new emphasis on divine outpourings of the Holy Spirit and conversions that implanted new believers with an intense love for God. Revivals encapsulated those hallmarks and carried the newly created evangelicalism into the early republic, setting the stage for the Second Great Awakening in the late 1790s.[34] In the early stages, evangelicals in the South, such as Methodists and Baptists, preached for religious freedom and abolition of slavery.
Government
Main article: Colonial government in the Thirteen Colonies

Each of the American colonies had a slightly different governmental structure. Typically, a colony was ruled by a governor appointed from London who controlled the executive administration and relied upon a locally elected legislature to vote on taxes and make laws. By the 18th century, the American colonies were growing very rapidly as a result of low death rates along with ample supplies of land and food. The colonies were richer than most parts of Britain, and attracted a steady flow of immigrants, especially teenagers who arrived as indentured servants.[35]
Servitude and slavery
Main articles: Indentured servitude in British America and Slavery in the colonial history of the United States
A map of the British, French and Spanish settlements in North America in 1750, before the French and Indian War

Over half of all European immigrants to Colonial America arrived as indentured servants.[36] Typically, people would sign a contract agreeing to a set term of labor, usually four to seven years, and in return would receive transport to America and a piece of land at the end of their servitude. In some cases, ships' captains received rewards for the delivery of poor migrants, and so extravagant promises and kidnapping were common.[4]

The first African slaves arrived in 1619.[37] Initially regarded as indentured servants who could buy their freedom, the institution of slavery began to harden and the involuntary servitude became lifelong[37] as the demand for labor on tobacco and rice plantations grew in the 1660s.[citation needed] Slavery became identified with brown skin color, and the children of slave women were born slaves, known as partus sequitur ventrem.[37] By the 1770s, African slaves comprised a fifth of the American population.

The question of independence from Britain did not arise as long as the colonies needed British military support against the French and Spanish powers. Those threats were gone by 1765. However, London continued to regard the American colonies as existing for the benefit of the mother country in a policy known as mercantilism.[35]

Colonial America was defined by a severe labor shortage that used forms of unfree labor, such as slavery and indentured servitude. The British colonies were also marked by a policy of avoiding strict enforcement of parliamentary laws, known as salutary neglect. This permitted the development of an American spirit distinct from that of its European founders.[38]
Revolutionary period (1754–1793)
Main article: History of the United States (1776–1789)
Lead-up to the Revolution
Further information: Boston Tea Party
A portrait depicting the Boston Tea Party on December 16, 1773, a prominent act of rebellion that served to dramatically escalate the American Revolution, leading ultimately to the commencement of the American Revolutionary War at the Battles of Lexington and Concord on April 19, 1775

The French and Indian War (1754–1763), part of the larger Seven Years' War, was a watershed event in the political development of the colonies. The influence of the French and Native Americans, the main rivals of the British Crown in the colonies and Canada, was significantly reduced and the territory of the Thirteen Colonies expanded into New France in Canada and Louisiana.[citation needed] The war effort also resulted in greater political integration of the colonies, as reflected in the Albany Congress and symbolized by Benjamin Franklin's call for the colonies to "Join, or Die."[39]

King George III issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763, to organize the new North American empire and protect the Native Americans from colonial expansion west of the Appalachian Mountains. Strains developed in the relations between the colonists and the Crown. The British Parliament passed the Stamp Act of 1765, imposing a tax on the colonies without going through the colonial legislatures. Crying "No taxation without representation", the colonists refused to pay.[40]. On March 5, 1770, in an event that would fuel anti-British sentiment in Boston, British troops opened fire on protesters in Boston, killing five people in the Boston Massacre.

On December 16, 1773, the Boston Tea Party was a direct action to protest the new tax on tea. Parliament responded the next year with the Intolerable Acts, stripping Massachusetts of its historic right of self-government and putting it under military rule, which sparked outrage and resistance in all thirteen colonies. Patriot leaders from every colony convened the First Continental Congress to coordinate their resistance. The Congress called for a boycott of British trade, published a list of rights and grievances, and petitioned the king to rectify those grievances.[41] This appeal had no effect.
American Revolution
Main article: American Revolution
Thomas Jefferson, the principal author of the Declaration of Independence and a principle intellectual force behind the American Revolution, wrote the first draft of the Declaration in isolation over a period of two weeks between June 11, 1776, and June 28, 1776, from the second floor of a three-story home he was renting at 700 Market Street in Philadelphia. The Declaration was unanimously adopted by the Second Continental Congress a week later, on July 4, 1776, at present-day Independence Hall
Washington's covert crossing of the Delaware River over the night of December 25–26, 1776, represented a major comeback for the cause of American independence following the loss of New York City, allowing Washington and the Continental Army to launch surprise attacks on the British Army in Trenton and Princeton and recapture New Jersey.

The Second Continental Congress voted to declare independence on July 2, 1776. The Declaration of Independence presented arguments in favor of the rights of citizens, stating that all men are created equal, supporting the rights of Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness, and demanding the consent of the governed.[42] The Founding Fathers were guided by the ideology of republicanism, rejecting the monarchism of Great Britain.[43] The Declaration of Independence was signed by members of the Congress on July 4.[42] This date has since been commemorated as Independence Day.[44]

The American Revolutionary War began with the Battles of Lexington and Concord on April 19, 1775.[45] George Washington was appointed general of the Continental Army.[46] Washington's crossing of the Delaware River began a series of victories that expelled British forces from New Jersey.[47] The British began the Saratoga campaign in 1777 to capture Albany, New York, as a choke point.[48] After American victory at Saratoga, France, the Netherlands, and Spain began providing support to the Continental Army.[49] Britain responded to defeat in the northern theater by advancing in the southern theater, beginning with the Capture of Savannah in 1778.[50] American forces reclaimed the south in 1781, and the British Army was defeated in the Siege of Yorktown on October 19, 1781.[51]

King George III formally ordered the end of hostilities on December 5, 1782, recognizing American independence.[52] The Treaty of Paris was signed on September 3, 1783,[53] and was ratified by the Congress of the Confederation on January 14, 1784.[54]
Confederation period
Main article: Confederation period

The Articles of Confederation were ratified as the governing law of the United States, written to limit the powers of the central government in favor of states. This caused economic decline, as the government was unable to pass economic legislation, levy taxes, and pay its debts.[55] Nationalists worried that the confederate nature of the union was too fragile to withstand an armed conflict with any adversarial states, or even internal revolts such as Shays' Rebellion of 1786 in Massachusetts.[56]

In the 1780s the western regions were ceded by the states to Congress and became territories. With the migration of settlers to the Northwest, soon they became states.[56] The American Indian Wars continued in the 1780s as settlers moved west.[57] The Northwestern Confederacy and American settlers began fighting the Northwest Indian War in the late 1780s; the Northwestern Confederacy received British support, but the settlers received little assistance from the American government.[58][59]

Nationalists – most of them war veterans – organized in every state and convinced Congress to call the Philadelphia Convention in 1787. The delegates from every state wrote a new Constitution that created a federal government with a strong president and powers of taxation. The new government reflected the prevailing republican ideals of guarantees of individual liberty and of constraining the power of government through separation of powers.[56] The constitution was ratified by a sufficient number of states in 1788 to begin forming a federal government.[60]
Early republic (1793–1830)
Main article: History of the United States (1789–1815)

The United States Electoral College chose George Washington as the first President in 1789.[61] The national capital moved from New York to Philadelphia in 1790 and finally, in 1800, to Washington, D.C.

The major accomplishment of the Washington Administration was the creation of a strong national government that was recognized by all Americans.[62] Washington's government, following the vigorous leadership of Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton, assumed the debts of the states, created the Bank of the United States, and set up a uniform system of tariffs and other taxes to pay off the debt and provide a financial infrastructure. Hamilton created the Federalist Party to support his programs. In 1791, to assuage the Anti-Federalists who feared a too-powerful central government, the Congress adopted the United States Bill of Rights by amending it to the U.S. Constitution, to guarantee individual liberties such as freedom of speech and religious practice.[63]

Thomas Jefferson and James Madison formed an opposition Republican Party (usually called the Democratic-Republican Party). In 1794, Hamilton and Washington presented the country with the Jay Treaty which re-established good relations with Britain. The Jeffersonians vehemently protested, and the voters aligned behind one party or the other, thus setting up the First Party System.[64] Although the treaty passed, politics became intensely heated.[65] Serious challenges to the new federal government included the Northwest Indian War, the ongoing Cherokee–American wars, and the 1794 Whiskey Rebellion, in which western settlers protested against a federal tax on liquor.[66]

Washington refused to serve more than two terms, setting a precedent for future administrations.[67] John Adams of the Federalist Party defeated Jefferson in the 1796 election. War was looming with France, and the Federalists used the opportunity to try silencing the Republicans with the Alien and Sedition Acts; they also built up a large army with Hamilton at the head, in preparation for a French invasion. However, the Federalists became divided after Adams sent a successful peace mission to France that ended the Quasi-War of 1798.[64][68]
Increasing demand for slave labor
Main article: Slavery in the United States
Slaves Waiting for Sale: Richmond, Virginia, an 1861 portrait by British painter Eyre Crowe

During the first two decades after the Revolutionary War, there were dramatic changes in the status of slavery among the states and an increase in the number of free blacks. Inspired by revolutionary ideals of equality, and influenced by their reduced economic reliance on the use of slaves, the Northern states abolished slavery.

States of the Upper South made manumission easier, resulting in an increase in the proportion of free blacks in the Upper South (as a percentage of the total non-white population) from less than one percent in 1792 to more than ten percent by 1810. By that date, a total of 13.5 percent of all blacks in the United States were free.[69] In 1807, with four million slaves already in the United States, Congress severed U.S. involvement with the Atlantic slave trade.[70]
Second Great Awakening
Main article: Second Great Awakening
A drawing of a Protestant camp meeting, c. 1829

The Second Great Awakening was a Protestant revival movement that affected virtually all of society during the early 19th century and led to rapid church growth. It began around 1790 and was gaining momentum by 1800; its membership rose rapidly after 1820 among Baptist and Methodist congregations, whose preachers led the movement. It was past its peak by the 1840s.[71]

The movement enrolled millions of new members in existing evangelical denominations and led to the formation of new denominations. The Second Great Awakening stimulated the establishment of many reform movements, including abolitionism and temperance.[72]
Louisiana and Jeffersonian republicanism
Main articles: Presidency of Thomas Jefferson and Louisiana Purchase
Land acquired in the Louisiana Purchase in 1803, highlighted in white

Thomas Jefferson heavily defeated John Adams in the 1800 presidential election. Jefferson's major achievement as president was the Louisiana Purchase in 1803, which provided U.S. settlers with vast potential for expansion west of the Mississippi River.[73] He supported expeditions to explore and map the new domain, most notably the Lewis and Clark Expedition.[74]

Jefferson believed deeply in republicanism and advocated that it should be based on the independent yeoman farmer and planter; he distrusted cities, factories and banks. He also distrusted the federal government and judges, and he tried to weaken the judiciary. Although the Constitution specified a Supreme Court, its functions were vague until John Marshall, the Chief Justice of the United States (1801‍–‍1835), defined them – especially the power to overturn acts of Congress or states that violated the Constitution, first enunciated in 1803 in the Marbury v. Madison case.[75]
War of 1812
Main article: War of 1812
See also: History of the United States (1789–1815)

Americans were increasingly angered by the British violation of American ships' neutral rights to harm France, the coercion of 10,000 American sailors needed by the Royal Navy to fight Napoleon, and British support for hostile Indians attacking American settlers in the American Midwest – with the goal of creating a pro-British Indian barrier state to block American expansion westward. Britain may also have wished to annex all or part of British North America, although this is still heavily debated.[76][77][78][page needed][79][80] Despite strong opposition from the Northeast, especially from Federalists who did not want to disrupt trade with Britain, Congress declared war on the United Kingdom on June 18, 1812.[81]
After the Battle of Lake Erie, Oliver Hazard Perry's message to William Henry Harrison began with: "We have met the enemy and they are ours", depicted in a 1865 painting by William H. Powell.[82]

Both sides tried to invade the other and were repelled. The American militia proved ineffective because the soldiers were reluctant to leave home, and efforts to invade Canada failed repeatedly. The British blockade ruined American commerce, bankrupted the Treasury, and further angered New Englanders who began smuggling supplies to Britain. Under General William Henry Harrison, the Americans eventually gained naval control of Lake Erie and defeated the Indians under Tecumseh in Canada,[83] while Andrew Jackson ended the Indian threat in the Southeast. The Indian threat to expansion into the Midwest was permanently ended. The British invaded and occupied much of Maine.

In 1814, the British raided and burned Washington but were pushed back at Baltimore, where "The Star-Spangled Banner" was written to celebrate the American success. In upstate New York, a major British invasion of New York State was repelled at the Battle of Plattsburgh, and Andrew Jackson decisively defeated a major British invasion at the Battle of New Orleans in early 1815.[84] The Americans claimed victory on February 18, as the news broke of Jackson's victory of New Orleans and the peace treaty that left the pre-war boundaries in place. This "second war of independence" contributed to an emerging American identity that cemented national pride over state pride.[85] The War of 1812 also dispelled America's negative perception of a standing army as opposed to ill-equipped and poorly trained militias.[86]
Era of Good Feelings
Main article: Era of Good Feelings
Depiction of election-day activities in Philadelphia by John Lewis Krimmel in 1815

National euphoria after the victory at New Orleans ruined the prestige of the Federalists, and they no longer played a significant role as a political party.[87] President Madison and most of the Republicans realized they had been foolish to allow the First Bank of the United States to close down, for its absence had greatly hindered the financing of the war. With the assistance of foreign bankers, they chartered the Second Bank of the United States in 1816.[88][89]

The Republicans also imposed tariffs designed to protect the infant industries that had been created when Britain was blockading the U.S. With the collapse of the Federalists as a party, the adoption of many Federalist principles by the Republicans, and the systematic policy of President James Monroe in his two terms (1817‍–‍1825) to downplay partisanship, society entered an Era of Good Feelings and closed out the First Party System.[88][89]

Expressed in 1823, the Monroe Doctrine proclaimed the idealistic standpoint of the United States that European powers should no longer colonize or interfere in the Americas. This was a defining moment in U.S. foreign policy.[90]

In 1832, President Andrew Jackson ran for a second term under the slogan "Jackson and no bank" and did not renew the Second Bank's charter, dissolving the bank in 1836.[91] He was convinced that central banking was used by the elite to take advantage of the average American, and he opted instead to implement publicly owned banks in various U.S. states, popularly known as "pet banks".[91]
Expansion and reform (1830–1848)
Main article: History of the United States (1815–1849)
Second Party System
Main articles: Second Party System and Presidency of Andrew Jackson

The former Jeffersonian (Democratic-Republican) party split into factions over the choice of a successor to President James Monroe, and the party faction that supported many of the old Jeffersonian principles, led by Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren, became the Democratic Party. As Norton explains the transformation in 1828:

    Jacksonians believed the people's will had finally prevailed. Through a lavishly financed coalition of state parties, political leaders, and newspaper editors, a popular movement had elected the president. The Democrats became the nation's first well-organized national party, and tight party organization became the hallmark of nineteenth-century American politics.[92]

Opposing factions led by Henry Clay helped form the Whig Party. The Democratic Party had a small but decisive advantage over the Whigs until the 1850s, when the Whigs fell apart over the issue of slavery.
Westward expansion and manifest destiny
Main articles: American frontier, Manifest destiny, and Indian removal
The Indian Removal Act resulted in the transplantation of several Native American tribes and the Trail of Tears

The country grew rapidly in population and area, as pioneers pushed the frontier of settlement west.[93][94] Native American tribes in some places resisted militarily, but they were overwhelmed by settlers and the army, and after 1830, were relocated to reservations in the west.[95] That year, Congress passed the Indian Removal Act, which authorized the president to negotiate treaties that exchanged Native American tribal lands in the eastern states for lands west of the Mississippi River.[96] Its goal was primarily to remove Native Americans, including the Five Civilized Tribes, from desirable lands in what's now Oklahoma.[97] Thousands of deaths resulted from the relocations, as seen in the Cherokee Trail of Tears,[97] most infamously of which resulted in approximately 4,000 of the 16,000 relocated Cherokee dying along the way in 1838.[98][99] Many of the Seminole Indians in Florida refused to move west, and fought the Army for years in the Seminole Wars.
During the California Gold Rush, some 300,000 people relocated to California from the rest of the United States and abroad following the discovery of gold in the state.

Manifest destiny was the belief that American settlers were destined to expand across the continent.[100] Manifest destiny was rejected by modernizers, especially the Whigs like Henry Clay and Abraham Lincoln who wanted to build cities and factories – not more farms.[b] Democrats strongly favored expansion, and won the key election of 1844. After a bitter debate in Congress, the Republic of Texas was annexed in 1845, leading to the Mexican–American War.[102] The U.S. Army invaded Mexico at several points, captured Mexico City, and won the war decisively.[101]

The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ended the war in 1848. In the treaty, the U.S. acquired much of the American Southwest, including California and New Mexico, with Mexico being paid $15 million in compensation. Many Democrats wanted to annex all of Mexico, but that idea was rejected by White Southerners, who argued that incorporating millions of Mexican people, mainly of mixed race, would undermine the U.S. as an exclusively white republic.[101] Instead, the U.S. took Texas and the lightly settled northern parts (California and New Mexico). Simultaneously, gold was discovered in California in 1848, and led to over 100,000 white settlers flocking to California in 1849, the California Gold Rush miners, known as '49ers. California grew rapidly, and by 1850,the non-native population went from 1,000 to over 125,000 people by 1850. However, many Indians were devastated by the rapid influx of the rush of white settlers in the 1850s, and to clear the state for white settlement, the U.S. government began a policy of forcibly removing and exterminating the natives.[103]. The early 1830s to 1869, the Oregon Trail and its offshoots were used by over 300,000 settlers headed to California, Oregon, and other points in the far west. Wagon trains took five or six months on foot.[104]

A peaceful compromise with Britain gave the U.S. ownership of the Oregon Country, which was renamed the Oregon Territory.[102] The demand for guano, prized as an agricultural fertilizer, led the U.S. to pass the Guano Islands Act in 1856, which enabled U.S. citizens to take possession, in the name of the country, of unclaimed islands containing guano deposits. Under the act, the U.S. annexed nearly 100 islands in the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea. By 1903, 66 of these islands were recognized as U.S. territories.[105]

The women's suffrage movement began with the Seneca Falls Convention in 1848. It was organized by women's rights advocates and abolitionists, Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott. The convention began on July 19, 1848 in the town of Seneca Falls, New York, with 300 people in attendance, and concluded the next day with signing the Declaration of Sentiments demanding equal rights for women, including the right to vote.[c] The women's rights campaign during first-wave feminism was led by Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lucy Stone and Susan B. Anthony, among others. Stone and Paulina Wright Davis organized the prominent and influential National Women's Rights Convention in 1850.[107]
Civil War and Reconstruction (1848–1877)
Main articles: American Civil War, Reconstruction era, and Greater Reconstruction
Divisions between North and South
Main articles: Origins of the American Civil War, History of the United States (1849–1865), and Abolitionism in the United States
See also: Plantation complexes in the Southern United States, Proslavery thought, and Antebellum South
An 1863 map of the United States during the American Civil War, showing the affiliation of states and territories
   Union states
   Union territories not permitting slavery
   Border Union states, permitting slavery
   Confederate states
   Union territories permitting slavery (claimed by Confederacy)

The central issue after 1848 was the expansion of slavery, with the anti-slavery elements in the North pitted against the pro-slavery elements in the South.[108] By 1860, there were four million slaves in the South. A small number of Northerners called abolitionists sought the immediate abolition of slavery, while much larger numbers in the North were opposed to the expansion of slavery and sought to put it on the path to extinction.[108]

There was resistance to slavery by both peaceful and violent means. Slave rebellions by Gabriel Prosser (1800), Denmark Vesey (1822) and Nat Turner (1831), caused fear in the white South, where stricter oversight of slaves was imposed, and the rights of free Black people were reduced.[citation needed] Southern white Democrats insisted that slavery was of economic, social, and cultural benefit, even to the slaves themselves.[108] Supporters of slavery argued that a sudden end to the slave economy would have a fatal economic impact in the South, causing widespread unemployment and chaos; slave labor was the foundation of their economy.[109]

The plantations were highly profitable because of the heavy European demand for raw cotton. Northern cities and regional industries were tied economically to slavery through banking, shipping, and manufacturing, including their textile mills. In addition, Southern states benefited from slavery by having an increased apportionment in Congress due to the partial counting of slaves in their populations.
Remember Your Weekly Pledge, a collection box for the Massachusetts Anti-Slavery Society in 1850

The issue of slavery in the new territories was seemingly settled by the Compromise of 1850, which included the admission of California as a free state in exchange for no federal restrictions on slavery placed on Utah or New Mexico.[110] A point of contention was the Fugitive Slave Act, requiring free states to cooperate with slave owners when attempting to capture escaped slaves who defected via the Underground Railroad, while punishing those who aided runaway slaves. The act garnered outrage in the North, as they were forced to play a role in Southern slavery.[111][112][113]

The Missouri Compromise was repealed in 1854 with the Kansas–Nebraska Act; promoted by Stephen Douglas in the name of "popular sovereignty" and democracy, this act of Congress permitted voters to decide on the legality of slavery in each territory, and repealed the Missouri Compromise of 1820, which explicitly banned slavery in this territory. Anti-slavery forces rose in anger and alarm, forming the new Republican Party to oppose the expansion of slavery out west. Pro- and anti- slavery settlers rushed to Kansas to vote for or against slavery, resulting in years of bloodshed and violence called Bleeding Kansas. By the late 1850s, the young Republican Party dominated nearly all Northern states, and hence the electoral colleges. The party insisted that slavery would never be allowed to expand and would therefore slowly die out.[114]

The Supreme Court's 1857 decision in Dred Scott v. Sandford ruled that the Compromise was unconstitutional, and that free Black people were not U.S. citizens, and therefore unable to sue for their freedom. The decision enraged Northerners, and the Republicans worried that the decision could be used to expand slavery. The decision exacerbated tensions over slavery.[111][112][113]
Civil War
Main articles: American Civil War, Confederate States of America, and 1860 United States presidential election
See also: Union Army, Confederate States Army, Military history of African Americans in the American Civil War, End of the American Civil War, and End of slavery in the United States

After Republican Abraham Lincoln won the 1860 election, seven Southern states seceded from the Union and formed the Confederate States of America (Confederacy) on February 8, 1861 in order to persevere the instituton of slavery.[115] The Civil War began on April 12, 1861, when Confederate forces attacked a U.S. military installation at Fort Sumter in South Carolina. In response, Lincoln called on the states to send militiamen to recapture forts, protect Washington D.C., and "preserve the Union".[116] Lincoln's call led to four more states seceding and joining the Confederacy. A few of the (northernmost) slave states did not secede and became known as the border states; these were Delaware, Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri.[citation needed] During the war, the northwestern portion of Virginia seceded from the Confederacy, becoming the new Union state of West Virginia.[117]

The two armies' first major battle was the First Battle of Bull Run, which the Confederate victory proved to both sides that the war would be much longer than anticipated.[116] In the western theater, the Union Army was relatively successful, with major battles such as Perryville and Shiloh, along with Union Navy gunboat dominance of navigable rivers producing strategic Union victories and destroying major Confederate operations.[118] Warfare in the eastern theater began poorly for the Union. U.S. General George B. McClellan failed to capture the Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia, in his Peninsula campaign and retreated after attacks from Confederate General Robert E. Lee.[119]

Meanwhile, in 1861 and 1862, both sides concentrated on raising and training new armies. The Union successfully gained control of the border states, driving the Confederates out.[120] Lee's Army of Northern Virginia won battles in late 1862 and spring 1863, but he pushed too hard and ignored the Union threat in the west. He invaded Pennsylvania in search of supplies and to cause war-weariness in the North. In September 17, 1862, the Battle of Antietam was fought in Maryland, which would result in over 23,000 casualties in bloodiest day of the Civil War.[121]
A portrait of Robert E. Lee and the Confederate States Army surrendering to the Union Army following the Battle of Appomattox Court House in Appomattox County, Virginia, on April 9, 1865

The Emancipation Proclamation, issued by Lincoln on January 1, 1863, freed three million slaves in designated areas of the Confederacy in order to weaken the Confederate's troops and supplies.[122] In perhaps the turning point of the war, Lee's army was badly beaten by the Army of the Potomac, and in July 1863, the Union's victory at the Battle of Gettysburg in Pennsylvania, the deadliest battle in American military history with over 50,000 causualties, proved a turning point in the war.[120] Survivors of the battle were immediately redeployed to suppress the New York City draft riots by Irish Americans protesting Civil War conscription and the city's free Black population.[121]

In July 1863, Union forces under General Ulysses S. Grant gained control of the Mississippi River at the Battle of Vicksburg, splitting the Confederacy. In 1864, Union General William Tecumseh Sherman marched south from Chattanooga to capture Atlanta, a decisive victory that ended war jitters among Republicans in the North and helped Lincoln win re-election. Sherman's march to the sea was almost unopposed. Much of the South was destroyed, and could no longer provide desperately needed supplies to its armies. In spring 1864, Grant launched a war of attrition and pursued Lee to the final Appomattox campaign, which resulted in Lee surrendering in April 1865, ending the war after four years.[citation needed] By May 1865, the Union Army controlled all of the Confederacy and liberated all of the designated slaves.[122]

The Civil War was the world's earliest industrial war. Railroads, the telegraph, steamships, and mass-produced weapons were employed extensively. Civilian factories, mines, shipyards, and were mobilized.[123] Foreign trade increased, with the U.S. providing both food and cotton to Britain, and Britain sending in manufactured products and thousands of volunteers for the Union Army, and a few to the Confederate army. The Union blockade shut down Confederate ports. It remains the deadliest war in American history, resulting in the deaths of about 750,000 soldiers and an undetermined number of civilian casualties.[d] About ten percent of all Northern males 20–45 years old, and thirty percent of all Southern white males aged 18–40 died.[123] Many Black people died after being dislocated during the war and Reconstruction.[126]
Reconstruction
Main articles: Reconstruction era and History of the United States (1865–1918)
Further information: Ku Klux Klan, Jim Crow laws, and Nadir of American race relations

Reconstruction followed after the end of the war.[116][127][128] Days after the American Civil War ended with the Union victory and the surrender of the Appatomox Court House.[129] Lincoln was assassinated at Ford's Theater in Washington D.C. in April 1865 by John Wilkes Booth, and was succeeded by Andrew Johnson.[130]
A May 10, 1869 picture of the completion of the first transcontinental railroad in Promontory, Utah

After the war, the far west was developed and settled, first by wagon trains and riverboats, and then by the first transcontinental railroad in 1869. Many Northern European immigrants took up low-cost or free farms in the Prairie States. Mining for silver and copper encouraged development.[131]
An illustration of African-American Freedmen voting in New Orleans in 1867

The severe threats of starvation and displacement of the unemployed Freedmen were met by the first major federal relief agency, the Freedmen's Bureau, operated by the Army.[132] The bureau also took in freed slaves.[citation needed] Three "Reconstruction Amendments" expanded civil rights for black Americans: the 1865 Thirteenth Amendment outlawed slavery;[133] the 1868 Fourteenth Amendment guaranteed equal rights and citizenship for Black people;[134] the 1870 Fifteenth Amendment prevented race from being used to disenfranchise men.[135]

Ex-Confederates remained in control of most Southern states for over two years, until the Radical Republicans gained control of Congress in the 1866 elections. Johnson, who sought good treatment for ex-Confederates, was virtually powerless in the face of Congress and vetoed many civil rights laws; he was impeached in 1868, but the Senate's attempt to remove him from office failed by one vote. Congress enfranchised black men and temporarily banned many ex-Confederate leaders from holding office. New Republican governments came to power based on a coalition of Freedmen made up of Carpetbaggers (new arrivals from the North), and Scalawags (native white Southerners), backed by the Army. Opponents said they were corrupt and violated the rights of whites.[136]

During Reconstruction, for a brief period, many freed blacks could vote, and even hold public office as the Republicans occupied the South. In response to Radical Reconstruction, the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) emerged in 1865 as a white-supremacist terrorist organization opposed to black civil rights and Republican rule. President Ulysses Grant's enforcement of the Ku Klux Klan Act of 1871 shut them down.[136] Paramilitary groups, such as the White League and Red Shirts emerging around 1874, openly intimidated and attacked Black people voting.[136]
A September 1, 1868 cartoon from Tuscaloosa's Independent Monitor, threatening that the KKK will lynch scalawags (left) and carpetbaggers (right) the day President Ulysses S. Grant takes office in 1869

Reconstruction ended after the disputed 1876 election. The Compromise of 1877 gave Republican Rutherford B. Hayes the presidency in exchange for removing all remaining federal troops in the South, as the Democrats regained control of the Congress, and Reconstruction came to an end in 1877. As a result, the southern states passes harsh laws on African-Americans known as Jim Crow laws, that effectively disenfranchised Black and poor white voters by making voter registration more difficult through poll taxes and literacy tests. Black people were segregated from whites in the violently enforced Jim Crow system, and lynchings and threats of violence against blacks were commonplace.[137][138][139] In 1882, the United States passed the Chinese Exclusion Act (which barred all Chinese immigrants except for students and businessmen),[140] and the Immigration Act of 1882 (which barred all immigrants with mental health issues).[141]
Gilded Age and the Progressive Era (1877–1914)
Main articles: Gilded Age, Progressive Era, and Second Industrial Revolution
After Reconstruction

The "Gilded Age" was a term that Mark Twain used to describe the period of the late 19th century with a dramatic expansion of American wealth and prosperity, underscored by mass corruption in government.[142] Some historians have argued that the United States was effectively plutocratic for at least part of the era.[143][144][145] As financiers and industrialists such as J.P. Morgan and John D. Rockefeller began to amass vast fortunes, many observers were concerned that the nation was losing its pioneering egalitarian spirit.[146]

An unprecedented wave of immigration from Europe served to both provide the labor for American industry and create diverse communities in previously undeveloped areas. From 1880 to 1914, peak years of immigration, more than 22 million people migrated to the country.[147] Most were unskilled workers who quickly found jobs in mines, mills, and factories. Many immigrants were craftsmen and farmers who purchased inexpensive land on the prairies. Poverty, growing inequality and dangerous working conditions, along with socialist and anarchist ideas diffusing from European immigrants, led to the rise of the labor movement.[148][149][150]

Dissatisfaction on the part of the growing middle class with the corruption and inefficiency of politics, and the failure to deal with increasingly important urban and industrial problems, led to the dynamic progressive movement starting in the 1890s. Progressives called for the modernization and reform of decrepit institutions in the fields of politics, education, medicine, and industry.[151] "Muckraking" journalists exposed corruption in business and government, and highlighted rampant inner-city poverty. Progressives implemented antitrust laws and regulated such industries of meatpacking, drugs, and railroads. Four new constitutional amendments – the Sixteenth through Nineteenth – resulted from progressive activism, bringing the federal income tax, direct election of Senators, prohibition, and female suffrage.[151]

In 1881, President James A. Garfield was assassinated by Charles Guiteau.[152]
Unions and strikes
Main articles: Labor history of the United States and Union violence in the United States
A Harpers Weekly illustration by Frederic Remington depicting hundreds of boxcars and coal cars looted and burned and state and federal troops violently attacked striking workers on July 7, 1894

Skilled workers banded together to control their crafts and raise wages by forming labor unions in industrial areas of the Northeast. Samuel Gompers led the American Federation of Labor (1886–1924), coordinating multiple unions. In response to heavy debts and decreasing farm prices, wheat and cotton farmers joined the Populist Party.[153]

The Panic of 1893 created a severe nationwide depression.[154] Many railroads went bankrupt. Labor unrest involved numerous strikes, most notably the violent Pullman Strike of 1894, which was forcibly shut down by federal troops. One of the disillusioned leaders of the Pullman strike, Eugene V. Debs, went on to become the leader of the Socialist Party of America.[155]
Economic growth

Important legislation of the era included the 1883 Civil Service Act, which mandated a competitive examination for applicants for government jobs, the 1887 Interstate Commerce Act, which ended railroads' discrimination against small shippers, and the 1890 Sherman Antitrust Act, which outlawed monopolies in business.[142]

After 1893, the Populist Party gained strength among farmers and coal miners, but was overtaken by the even more popular Free silver movement, which demanded using silver to enlarge the money supply and end the depression.[156] Financial and railroad communities fought back hard, arguing that only the gold standard would save the economy. In the 1896 presidential election, conservative Republican William McKinley defeated silverite William Jennings Bryan.[157]
The assassination of William McKinley in Buffalo, New York on September 6, 1901, depicted in a portrait by Leon Czolgosz

Prosperity returned under McKinley. The gold standard was enacted, and the tariff was raised. By 1900, the U.S. had the strongest economy in the world.[158] McKinley was assassinated by Leon Czolgosz in 1901, and was succeeded by Theodore Roosevelt.[159]

The period also saw a major transformation of the banking system, with the arrival of the first credit union in 1908 and the creation of the Federal Reserve System in 1913.[160][161] Apart from two short recessions in 1907 and 1920, the economy remained prosperous and growing until 1929.[158]
Imperialism
Further information: American imperialism and Spanish–American War
A cartoon reflecting Judge magazine view that the U.S. maintained imperial ambitions following its quick victory in the Spanish–American War in 1898[162]

The United States Army continued to fight wars with Native Americans as settlers encroached on their traditional lands. Gradually the U.S. purchased tribal lands and extinguished their claims, forcing most tribes onto subsidized reservations. According to the U.S. Census Bureau in 1894, from 1789 to 1894, the Indian Wars killed 19,000 white people and more than 30,000 Indians.[163]

The Spanish–American War began when Spain refused American demands to reform its oppressive policies in Cuba.[164] The war was a series of quick American victories on land and at sea. At the Treaty of Paris peace conference the United States acquired the Philippines, Puerto Rico, and Guam.[165] Cuba became an independent country, under close American tutelage. William Jennings Bryan led his Democratic Party in opposition to control of the Philippines, which he denounced as imperialism.[165] After defeating an insurrection by Filipino nationalists, the United States achieved little in the Philippines except in education. Infrastructural development lost much of its early vigor with the failure of the railroads.[166]

By 1908, however, Americans lost interest in an empire and turned their international attention to the Caribbean, especially the building of the Panama Canal. The canal opened in 1914 and increased trade with Japan and the rest of the Far East. A key innovation was the Open Door Policy, whereby the imperial powers were given equal access to Chinese business, with none of them allowed to take control of China.[167]
Women's suffrage
Main article: Women's suffrage in the United States
A Women's suffragists parade in New York City in October 1917, featuring placards with the signatures of more than a million women[168]

The women's suffrage movement reorganized after the Civil War. By the end of the 19th century, a few Western states had granted women full voting rights,[107] and women gained rights in areas such as property and child custody law.[169]

Around 1912, the feminist movement reawakened, putting an emphasis on its demands for equality and arguing that the corruption of American politics demanded purification by women.[170] Alice Paul split from the large, moderate National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA), led by Carrie Chapman Catt, and formed the more militant National Woman's Party. Suffragists were arrested during their "Silent Sentinels" pickets at the White House and taken as political prisoners.[171]

The anti-suffragist argument that only men could fight in a war, therefore only men deserved the right to vote, was refuted by the participation of American women on the home front in World War I. The success of women's suffrage was demonstrated by the politics of some U.S. states that were already allowing women to vote, including Montana, which elected the first woman to the House of Representatives, Jeannette Rankin. The main resistance came from the South, where white leaders were worried about the threat of black women being allowed to vote. Congress passed the Nineteenth Amendment in 1919, and women first voted in 1920.[172] Politicians responded to the new electorate by emphasizing issues of special interest to women, especially prohibition, child health, and world peace.[173][174]
Modern America and World Wars (1914–1945)
World War I and the interwar years
Main article: History of the United States (1917–1945)
See also: American entry into World War I, United States home front during World War I, United States in World War I, and Roaring Twenties
Meuse-Argonne American Cemetery in France, a cemetery for U.S. servicemen killed in Europe during their service in World War I

As World War I raged in Europe from 1914, President Woodrow Wilson declared neutrality, but warned Germany that resumption of unrestricted submarine warfare against American ships would mean war. Germany decided to take the risk, and try to win by cutting off supplies to Britain through the sinking of ships such as the RMS Lusitania. The U.S. declared war in April 1917.[175]

By the summer of 1918 soldiers in General John J. Pershing's American Expeditionary Forces arrived at the rate of 10,000 a day, while Germany was unable to replace its losses.[176] Dissent against the war was suppressed by the Sedition Act of 1918 and Espionage Act of 1917. Over 2,000 were imprisoned for speaking out against the war.[177]

The Allies won in November 1918. Wilson dominated the 1919 Paris Peace Conference, putting his geopolitical hopes in the new League of Nations as Germany was treated harshly in the Treaty of Versailles (1919). Wilson refused to compromise with Senate Republicans over the issue of Congressional power to declare war, and the Senate rejected the Treaty and the League.[178] Instead, the United States chose to pursue unilateralism.[179] The aftershock of Russia's October Revolution resulted in fears of Communism in the United States, leading to a Red Scare and the deportation of non-citizens considered subversive.

Despite the Progressive-era modernization of hospitals and medical schools,[180] the country lost around 550,000 lives to the Spanish flu pandemic in 1918 and 1919.[181][182] During the "Roaring" 1920s, the economy expanded. African-Americans benefited from the Great Migration and had more cultural power, an example being the Harlem Renaissance which spread jazz music. Meanwhile, the Ku Klux Klan had a resurgence, and the Immigration Act of 1924 was passed to strictly limit the number of new entries.[183]

Prohibition began in 1920, when the manufacture, sale, import and export of alcohol were prohibited by the Eighteenth Amendment. Bootlegged alcohol in the cities ended up under the control of gangs, who fought each other for territory. Italian bootleggers in New York City gradually formed the Mafia crime syndicate. In 1933, President Franklin D. Roosevelt repealed prohibition.[184]
Great Depression and the New Deal
Main articles: New Deal, Presidency of Herbert Hoover, and Presidency of Franklin D. Roosevelt
A depiction of the sharp decrease of the money supply between Black Tuesday and the Bank Holiday when massive bank runs commences across the United States in March 1933

The Great Depression (1929–1939) and the New Deal (1933–1936) were decisive moments in American political, economic, and social history.[185] A financial bubble was fueled by an inflated stock market, which led to the Wall Street crash on October 29, 1929.[186] This, along with other economic factors, triggered a worldwide depression. The United States experienced deflation as prices fell, unemployment soared from 3% in 1929 to 25% in 1933, farm prices fell by half, and manufacturing output plunged by one-third.

The New Deal enacted by President Franklin D. Roosevelt was a series of permanent reform programs including Social Security, unemployment relief and insurance, public housing, bankruptcy insurance, farm subsidies, and regulation of financial securities.[187] It also provided unemployment relief through the Works Progress Administration (WPA) and for young men, the Civilian Conservation Corps. Large-scale spending projects designed to rebuild infrastructure were under the purview of the Public Works Administration.[187]

State governments introduced the sales tax to pay for new programs. Ideologically, the New Deal established modern liberalism in the United States.[187] The New Deal coalition won re-election for Roosevelt in 1936, 1940, and 1944.[187] The Second New Deal in 1935 and 1936 brought the economy further left, building up labor unions through the Wagner Act. Roosevelt weakened his second term by a failed effort to pack the Supreme Court, which had been a center of conservative resistance to his programs.[187] The economy essentially recovered by 1936, but long-term unemployment remained a problem until it was solved by wartime spending. Most of the relief programs were dropped in the 1940s, when the conservatives regained power in Congress through the Conservative coalition.[187]
World War II
Main articles: World War II, United States in World War II, and Military history of the United States during World War II
See also: Historiography of World War II and United States home front during World War II
The USS Arizona burning after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941

During the Depression, the United States remained focused on domestic concerns. U.S. legislation in the Neutrality Acts sought to avoid foreign conflicts; however, policy clashed with increasing anti-Nazi feelings following the German invasion of Poland in September 1939 that started World War II.[188] At first, Roosevelt positioned the U.S. as the "Arsenal of Democracy", pledging full-scale financial and munitions support for the Allies and Lend-Lease agreements – but no military personnel.[188]

Japan tried to neutralize America's power in the Pacific by attacking Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, but instead it catalyzed American support to enter the war.[189] Roosevelt's Executive Order 9066 resulted in over 120,000 Americans of Japanese descent being removed from their homes and placed in internment camps.[190][191][192] The Allies fought against Germany in the European theater and Japan in the Pacific War.[193] The United States was one of the "Allied Big Four", alongside the United Kingdom, Soviet Union, and China.[194][195]

The U.S. gave the Allied war effort money, food, petroleum, technology, and military personnel. The U.S. focused on maximizing its national economic output, causing a dramatic increase in GDP, the end of unemployment, and a rise in civilian consumption, even as 40% of the GDP went to the war effort.[185] A wartime production boom led to the end of the Great Depression. Tens of millions of workers moved into the active labor force and to higher-productivity jobs. Labor shortages encouraged industries to look for new sources of workers, finding new roles for women and Black people. Economic mobilization was managed by the War Production Board.[185] Most durable goods became unavailable or were tightly rationed, while housing for industrial jobs was in short supply. Prices and wages were controlled, and Americans saved a high portion of their incomes, which led to post-war growth.[196][197]

The U.S. stopped Japanese expansion in the Pacific in 1942; after the loss of the Philippines to Japanese conquests, as well as a draw in the Battle of the Coral Sea in May, the American Navy then inflicted a decisive blow at Midway in June 1942. The Allied forces built up a garrison on Guadalcanal island, formerly held by the Japanese, after the successes of the Battle of the Eastern Solomons and the Battle of Guadalcanal. The Japanese then stopped advancing south, and the U.S. began taking New Guinea. Japan also lost their invasion of the Alaskan Aleutian Islands, allowing the U.S. to begin attacking the Japanese-controlled Kuril Islands.[193]

American ground forces assisted in the North African campaign and the collapse of Fascist Italy in 1943. A more significant European front was opened on D-Day, June 6, 1944, in which Allied forces invaded Nazi-occupied France.[193] The Allies began pushing the Germans out of France in the Normandy campaign. After Allied forces landed at the French Riviera in Operation Dragoon, Hitler allowed his army to retreat from Normandy.[198] Roosevelt died in 1945, and was succeeded by Harry Truman.[199] The western front stopped short of Berlin, leaving the Soviets to take it in the Battle of Berlin. The Nazi regime formally capitulated in May 1945, ending the war in Europe.[193]
Raising the Flag on Iwo Jima, a photo of U.S. Marines raising a U.S. flag atop Mount Suribachi during the Battle of Iwo Jima on February 23, 1945

In the Pacific, the U.S. implemented an island hopping strategy toward Tokyo. The Philippines was eventually reconquered, after Japan and the United States fought in history's largest naval battle, the Battle of Leyte Gulf.[200] After the war, the U.S. granted the Philippines independence.[201]

Military research and development increased during the war, leading to the Manhattan Project, a secret effort to harness nuclear fission to produce atomic bombs;[202] the first nuclear device was detonated on July 16, 1945.[203] U.S. airfields in the Mariana Islands allowed for easier bombing of Japan and hard-fought U.S. victories at Iwo Jima and Okinawa in 1945.[204] The U.S. initially prepared to invade Japan's home islands, but they dropped atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945, killing at least 200,000 residents in both cities, compelling Japan to surrender and ending World War II.[205] The U.S. occupied Japan (and part of Germany).[206] Throughout the 4 years of American involvement in World War II, 400,000 American military personnel and civilians were killed.[207] Nuclear weapons have not been used since the war ended, and a "long peace" began between the global powers, but they still competed in the Cold War.[208]
Cold War (1945–1991)
Main articles: Cold War, History of the United States (1945–1964), History of the United States (1964–1980), and History of the United States (1980–1991)
The NATO (blue) and Warsaw Pact (red) alliances during the Cold War from 1949 to 1990
Economic boom and the beginning of the Cold War
Truman administration
Main articles: Presidency of Harry S. Truman and Cold War (1948–1953)

In the decades after World War II, the United States became a global influence in economic, political, military, cultural, and technological affairs. Following World War II, the United States emerged as one of the two dominant superpowers, the Soviet Union being the other. The U.S. Senate approved U.S. participation in the United Nations (UN), which marked a turn away from traditional American isolationism and toward increased international involvement.[209] The United States and other major Allied powers became the foundation of the UN Security Council.[210] The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) was created in 1947.[211]
Marshall Plan poster
One of a number of posters created by the Economic Cooperation Administration, an agency of the U.S. government, to sell the Marshall Plan in Europe following the end of World War II

The U.S. wished to rescue Europe from the devastation of World War II, and to contain the expansion of communism, represented by the Soviet Union. U.S. foreign policy during the Cold War was built around the support of Western Europe and Japan along with the policy of containment (containing the spread of communism).[212] The Truman Doctrine in 1947 was the U.S.' attempt to secure trading partners in Europe, by providing military and economic aid to Greece and Turkey to counteract the threat of communist expansion in the Balkans.[213][208] In 1948, the United States replaced piecemeal financial aid programs with a comprehensive Marshall Plan, which pumped money into Western Europe, and removed trade barriers, while modernizing the managerial practices of businesses and governments.[214] Post-war American aid to Europe totaled $25 billion, out of the U.S. GDP of $258 billion in 1948.[214]

In 1949, the United States, rejecting the long-standing policy of no military alliances in peacetime, formed the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) alliance. In response, the Soviets formed the Warsaw Pact of communist states, leading to the "Iron Curtain".[214] In 1949, the Soviets performed their first nuclear weapon test.[208] This escalated the risk of nuclear warfare; the threat of mutually assured destruction, however, prevented both powers from nuclear war, and resulted the proxy wars in which the two sides did not directly confront each other.[208]

The U.S. fought against communists in the Korean War and Vietnam War, and toppled left-wing governments in the third world to try to stop its spread, such as Iran in 1953 and Guatemala in 1954.[212] McCarthyism was a widespread government program led by Senator Joseph McCarthy to expose communists in government and business. Hollywood was targeted by the House Un-American Activities Committee.[215] Gay people were targeted under the McCarthyist Lavender Scare.[216]
Eisenhower administration
Main articles: Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower and Cold War (1953–1962)

Dwight D. Eisenhower was elected president in 1952 in a landslide.[217] He ended the Korean War, and avoided any other major conflict. He cut military spending by relying on advanced technology, such as nuclear weapons carried by long-range bombers and intercontinental missiles.[218] After Stalin died in 1953, Eisenhower worked to obtain friendlier relationships with the Soviet Union. At home, he ended McCarthyism, expanded the Social Security program, and presided over a decade of bipartisan cooperation.[218]

Domestically, after 1948, America entered an economic boom: 60% of the American population had attained a "middle-class" standard of living by the mid-1950s, compared with only 31% in the 1928 and 1929. Between 1947 and 1960, the average real income for American workers increased by as much as it had in the previous half-century.[219] The economy allowed for an affordable lifestyle with large families; this created the baby boom, in which millions of children were born at increased rates from 1945 to 1964.[220] Many Americans moved into suburban neighborhoods.[221]
The 101st Airborne Division escorting the Little Rock Nine into Little Rock Central High School in September 1957

In 1954, the Supreme Court ruled on Brown v. Board of Education, finding public school segregation unconstitutional.[222] When nine Black students were threatened over their admission into all-white Little Rock Central High School, Eisenhower sent in a thousand National Guard troops to ensure peace.[218] Starting in the late 1950s, institutionalized racism across the United States, but especially in the South, was increasingly challenged by the growing civil rights movement. The activism of Rosa Parks and Martin Luther King Jr. led to the boycott of segregated public buses in Montgomery, Alabama in 1955, organized by King and the Montgomery Improvement Association. They faced multiple acts of violence, but continued the boycott for a year, until the Supreme Court ordered the city to desegregate the buses.[222]

The Soviets unexpectedly surpassed American technology in 1957 with Sputnik, the first Earth satellite. The R-7 missile which launched Sputnik into space could have hypothetically dropped a nuclear bomb into U.S. air space from above; new American fears regarding Soviet power began the Space Race, a competition between the two countries to prove their technological superiority through space exploration. In 1958, Eisenhower created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) for this purpose. Angst about the weaknesses of American education led to large-scale federal support for science education and research.[223]
Civil unrest and social reforms
Main articles: History of the United States (1964–1980) and Cold War (1962-1991)
Further information: Presidency of John F. Kennedy, Presidency of Lyndon B. Johnson, and Great Society

In 1960, John F. Kennedy was elected President. His administration saw the acceleration of the country's role in the Space Race, escalation of the American role in the Vietnam War, the Bay of Pigs Invasion, and the Cuban Missile Crisis. President Kennedy was assassinated on November 22, 1963.[224] Lyndon B. Johnson then became president.[225] He secured congressional passage of his Great Society programs,[226] dealing with civil rights, the end of legal segregation, Medicare, extension of welfare, federal aid to education at all levels, subsidies for the arts and humanities, environmental activism, and a series of programs designed to wipe out poverty.[227][228]
Civil rights and counterculture movements
Main articles: Civil rights movement, Counterculture of the 1960s, and Second-wave feminism
Civil rights activists during the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom in Washington, D.C. in August 1963

For years, nonviolent civil rights activists organized direct actions, such as the 1963 Birmingham campaign and 1965 Selma to Montgomery march, where they also became victims of violence. Along with Supreme Court decisions like Loving v. Virginia and the 1963 March on Washington, these movements achieved great steps toward equality with laws like the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and the Fair Housing Act of 1968. These ended the Jim Crow laws that had legalized racial segregation.[229] Native Americans protested federal courts, highlighting the federal government's failure to honor treaties involving them. One of the most outspoken Native American groups was the American Indian Movement (AIM). In the 1960s, Cesar Chavez began organizing poorly paid Mexican-American farm workers in California, eventually forming the country's first successful union of farm workers, the United Farm Workers of America (UFW).[230]
U.S. soldiers searching a village for potential Viet Cong during the Vietnam War in October 1966
An anti-Vietnam War demonstration outside the Pentagon in October 1967

Amid the Cold War, the United States entered the Vietnam War, whose growing unpopularity fed already existing social movements. Feminism and the environmental movement became political forces, and progress continued toward civil rights for all Americans. A counterculture revolution in the late sixties and early seventies further divided Americans in a "culture war" but also brought forth more liberated social views.[231] Frustrations with the seemingly slow progress of the integration movement led to the emergence of more radical politics, such as the Black Power movement.[232] The summer of 1967 saw opposing philosophies in two widespread movements, the more peaceful summer of love and the radical long, hot summer, which included nationwide riots.[233] Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated in 1968.[234] The modern gay rights movement started after the Stonewall riots in 1969.[235]

A new consciousness of the inequality of American women began sweeping the nation, starting with the 1963 publication of Betty Friedan's best-seller, The Feminine Mystique, which critiqued the American cultural idea that women could only find fulfillment through their roles as wives, mothers, and keepers of the home. In 1966, Friedan and others established the National Organization for Women (NOW) to advocate for women's rights.[169][236] Protests began, and the new women's liberation movement grew in size and power, gaining much media attention.[237] The proposed Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution, passed by Congress in 1972, was defeated by a conservative coalition mobilized by Phyllis Schlafly.[237][238] However, many federal laws established women's equal status under the law, such as those equalizing pay, employment, education, employment opportunities, and credit between genders, and ending pregnancy discrimination. State laws criminalized spousal abuse and marital rape, and the Supreme Court ruled that the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment applied to women. Social custom and consciousness began to change, accepting women's equality. Abortion, deemed by the Supreme Court as a fundamental right in Roe v. Wade (1973), is still a point of debate.
Détente
Main article: Détente
Nixon and Ford administrations
Main articles: Presidency of Richard Nixon and Presidency of Gerald Ford
Buzz Aldrin (shown) and Neil Armstrong became the first humans to walk on the Moon during NASA's Apollo 11 mission in July 1969.

President Richard Nixon (1969–1974) largely continued the New Deal and Great Society programs he inherited.[225][239] Nixon created the Environmental Protection Agency,[240] opened relations with China, and attempted to gradually turn the Vietnam War effort over to the South Vietnamese. He negotiated the peace treaty in 1973 which secured the release of POWs and led to the withdrawal of U.S. troops. The war had cost the lives of 58,000 American troops. Nixon manipulated the fierce distrust between the Soviet Union and China to the advantage of the U.S., achieving détente with both parties.[239] He was also president during the U.S.' landing on the Moon in 1969.

The Watergate scandal, involving Nixon's cover-up of his operatives' break-in into the Democratic National Committee headquarters, destroyed his political base and forced his resignation on August 9, 1974.[239] He was succeeded by Vice President Gerald Ford.[239][241]

The Fall of Saigon on April 30, 1975, ended the Vietnam War.[239] In Central America, the U.S. government supported right-wing governments against left-wing groups, such as in El Salvador and Guatemala. In South America, they supported Argentina and Chile, who carried out Operation Condor, a campaign of assassinations of exiled political opponents by Southern Cone governments, created at the behest of Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet in 1975.[242][243][244]

The OPEC oil embargo marked a long-term economic transition: energy prices skyrocketed, and American factories faced serious competition from foreign automobiles, clothing, electronics, and consumer goods. By the late 1970s, the economy suffered an energy crisis, slow economic growth, high unemployment, very high inflation, and high interest rates (stagflation). Since economists agreed on deregulation, many of the New Deal era regulations were ended.[245] Meanwhile, the first mass-market personal computers were being developed in California's Silicon Valley.[246]
Carter administration
Main article: Presidency of Jimmy Carter

Jimmy Carter was elected president in 1976.[247] Carter brokered the Camp David Accords between Israel and Egypt. In 1979, Iranian students stormed the U.S. embassy in Tehran and took 66 Americans hostage. Carter lost the 1980 election to the Republican Ronald Reagan.[248] On January 20, 1981, minutes after Carter's term ended, the remaining U.S. captives were released.
End of the Cold War
Main article: History of the United States (1980–1991)
See also: Cold War (1985-1991)
Reagan administration
Main article: Presidency of Ronald Reagan
Monthly unemployment, inflation, and interest rates from January 1981 to January 1989

President Ronald Reagan's conservative policies produced a major political realignment with his 1980 and 1984 landslide elections.[249][250] Reagan's neoliberal economic policies (dubbed "Reaganomics") included the implementation of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981.[250][251][252] Reagan continued to downsize government taxation and regulation;[253] New Deal and Great Society programs were ended.[225] The U.S. experienced a recession in 1982, but after inflation decreased, unemployment then decreased, and the economic growth rate increased from 4.5% in 1982 to 7.2% in 1984.[254][255] However, homelessness and economic inequality also rose.[256][257]

The Reagan administration's expansion of the War on Drugs led to an increase in incarceration, particularly among African Americans, with the number of people imprisoned for drug offences rising from 50,000 to 400,000 between 1980 and 1997.[258][259] Manufacturing industries moving out of inner cities increased poverty in those areas; poverty increased drug dealing and contributed to the crack epidemic, which led to increased crime and incarceration.[258][260] The government also reacted slowly to the AIDS crisis, and banned reliable information on the disease, which led to higher infection rates.[261][262]

Reagan ordered a buildup of the U.S. military, incurring additional budget deficits.[263] The 1983 invasion of Grenada and 1986 bombing of Libya were popular in the U.S., though Reagan's backing of the Contra rebels was mired in the controversy over the Iran–Contra affair.[264] Reagan also introduced a complicated missile defense system known as the Strategic Defense Initiative. The Soviets reacted harshly because they thought it violated the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, and would give the U.S. a major military advantage, so they stopped negotiating disarmament deals until the late 1980s.[263]
U.S. Air Force aircraft fly over oil fields destroyed by the retreating Iraqi Ground Forces during the Gulf War in 1991

Reagan met four times with Gorbachev, and their summit conferences led to the signing of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty.
George H. W. Bush administration
Main articles: Presidency of George H. W. Bush and Post–Cold War era

International affairs drove the George H. W. Bush presidency, which navigated the end of the Cold War and a new era of U.S.–Soviet relations. In 1989 Bush directed a military invasion of Panama to overthrow Manuel Noriega. On December 3, 1989, Gorbachev and Bush declared the Cold War over at the Malta Summit. After the fall of the Berlin Wall, Bush successfully pushed for the reunification of Germany in close cooperation with West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, overcoming the reluctance of Gorbachev. The Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, leaving the United States as the sole superpower.[265]
Contemporary United States (1991–present)
Main articles: History of the United States (1991–2016) and History of the United States (2016–present)
George H. W. Bush and Clinton administrations
Main articles: Presidency of George H. W. Bush, Presidency of Bill Clinton, Third Way (United States), and Republican Revolution

After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the United States continued to intervene in international affairs. George H. W. Bush's administration led an international coalition against Iraq in the Gulf War after Iraq invaded neighboring Kuwait in 1990. The war undid the Iraqi annexation of Kuwait.[266] Under Bush, the U.S. also became involved in wars in Panama, Somalia, Bosnia, and Croatia.[267][268][269] In 1992, there were riots in Los Angeles over police brutality.[270]
Ruins following the Oklahoma City bombing in April 1995

Elected in 1992, President Bill Clinton oversaw economic expansion and passed the first balanced federal budget in 30 years.[271] Much of the economic boom was a side effect of the Digital Revolution, and new business opportunities created by the Internet.[272] During the Clinton administration, the U.S. was involved in wars in Haiti and Kosovo.[273][274]

Conservative Republicans heavily won the 1994 midterm elections in a "Republican Revolution", which was built around the Contract with America policy agenda.[275][276] Newt Gingrich was chosen as House Speaker,[275] and he would heavily influence the Republican Party to engage in "confrontational" political speech.[277][278] Clinton's leadership after the Oklahoma City bombing increased his popularity,[279] and he won in the 1996 presidential elections.[280] In 1998, Clinton was impeached by the House of Representatives on charges of lying under oath about a sexual relationship with White House intern Monica Lewinsky. He was acquitted by the Senate.[271]

In 2000, the dot-com bubble, a widespread overvaluation of Internet company stocks, burst and hurt the U.S. economy.[281][282] The close presidential election in 2000 between Governor George W. Bush and Al Gore was extremely close and produced a dramatic dispute over the counting of votes.[283] Bush ultimately won.[284]
George W. Bush administration
Main articles: Presidency of George W. Bush, September 11 attacks, and War on terror

In the September 11 attacks on September 11, 2001, 19 al-Qaeda hijackers commandeered four commercial planes to be used in suicide attacks. Two were crashed intentionally into both Twin Towers of the World Trade Center in New York City, and a third into the Pentagon in Arlington County, Virginia. The fourth plane was retaken by the passengers and crew and crashed into an empty field in Pennsylvania. Every building of the World Trade Center partially or completely collapsed, massively damaging the surrounding area and blanketing Lower Manhattan in toxic dust clouds. 2,977 victims died in the attacks, which proved the deadliest terrorist attack in world history.[285]

On September 20, Bush announced a "war on terror".[286][287] In October 2001, the U.S. and NATO invaded Afghanistan and ousted the Taliban regime, which had harbored al-Qaeda and its leader Osama bin Laden.[288] Bin Laden escaped to Pakistan, starting a manhunt.[289] The U.S. established new domestic efforts to prevent future attacks. The Patriot Act increased the power of government to monitor communications and removed legal restrictions on intelligence sharing between federal law enforcement agencies.[290] The government's indefinite detention of terrorism suspects captured abroad at the Guantanamo Bay detention camp led to allegations of human rights abuses and violations of international law.[291][292][293] The Department of Homeland Security was created to lead federal counter-terrorism activities.[290]

In March 2003, the U.S. launched an invasion of Iraq, claiming Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). Intelligence backing WMDs were later found to be inaccurate. The war led to the collapse of the Iraqi government and the eventual capture of Hussein.[294][295] The Iraq War fueled international protests and gradually saw domestic support decline.[296][297]

In 2005, Hurricane Katrina killed 1,800 people around New Orleans after the city's levees broke.[298] In 2007, after years of violence by the Iraqi insurgency, Bush deployed more troops in a strategy dubbed "the surge". While the death toll decreased, the political stability of Iraq remained in doubt.[299] In 2008, the U.S. entered the Great Recession.[300][301] Multiple overlapping crises were involved, especially the housing market crisis, a subprime mortgage crisis, soaring oil prices, an automotive industry crisis, rising unemployment, and the 2008 financial crisis, the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. The bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers threatened the stability of the entire economy in September 2008.[302] Starting in October, the federal government lent $245 billion to financial institutions through the bipartisan Troubled Asset Relief Program.[303][304]
Obama administration
Main articles: Great Recession in the United States, Presidency of Barack Obama, and Tea Party movement
Barack Obama delivering his 2009 inauguration speech

Barack Obama, the first multiracial and African American[305] president, was elected in 2008.[306] He signed the Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act, which allowed people to serve in the military while openly gay.[307] To help the economy, he signed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009,[308] Consumer Assistance to Recycle and Save Act,[309] the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, informally called "Obamacare",[310] and the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.[311][312] The unemployment rate began falling as the economy and labor markets experienced a recovery.[313]

These changes to the economic system created new political movements, such as the Occupy movement and the Tea Party movement.[314] The recession officially ended in mid-2009.[315] Following the 2010 midterm elections, Congress was in gridlock,[316] leading to the Budget Control Act of 2011.[317] The economic expansion that followed the Great Recession was the longest in U.S. history;[318][319] the unemployment rate reached a 50-year low in 2019.[320] Despite the strong economy, increases in the cost of living surpassed increases in wages.[321][322]

In 2009, Obama issued an executive order banning the use of torture.[323][324] He ordered the closure of secret CIA-run prisons overseas,[325][326] and sought to close the Guantanamo Bay detention camp, but his efforts were stymied by Congress.[327][328] American military personnel left Iraq in 2011.[329] Meanwhile, Obama increased involvement in Afghanistan, adding 30,000 troops, while proposing to begin withdrawal in 2014.[324] The U.S., with NATO, intervened in the Libyan Civil War in 2011.[330] In May 2011, Osama bin Laden was killed in Pakistan in a Navy SEALs raid ordered by Obama. While al-Qaeda was near collapse in Afghanistan, affiliated organizations continued to operate in Yemen and other remote areas, as the CIA used drones to hunt down its leadership.[331][332] In October, Obama sent troops to Central Africa to fight the Lord's Resistance Army.[333]

Following Obama's 2012 re-election, Congressional gridlock continued, resulting in the first government shutdown since the Clinton administration.[334] In 2012, the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting in Newtown, Connecticut, led to unsuccessful attempts from Obama to promote gun reform.[335] The Boston Marathon bombing of 2013 killed three people and injured more than 260.[336] In 2013, the U.S. also started a counter-terrorist intervention in Niger,[337] and began a covert operation to train rebels in Syria who were fighting against the terrorist group ISIS. The latter program was publicized and expanded in 2014.[338] That year, ISIS grew in scope in the Middle East, and inspired many terrorist attacks in the United States, including the 2015 San Bernardino attack.[339][340][341] The U.S. and its allies began a significant military offensive against ISIS in Iraq which lasted from 2014 to 2021.[342][343] In December 2014, Obama officially ended the combat mission in Afghanistan.[344]
The White House lit with rainbow colors in celebration of the legalization of gay marriage in June 2015

The shooting of Black teen Michael Brown by police officer Darren Wilson, and a grand jury declining to charge Wilson with murder, led to the Ferguson unrest in Missouri in 2014 and 2015.[345] In 2012, President Obama became the first president to openly support same-sex marriage.[346] The Supreme Court provided federal recognition of same-sex marriages in 2013,[347] and then legalized gay marriage nationwide with Obergefell v. Hodges in 2015.[348] Also in 2015, the U.S. joined the international Paris Agreement on climate change.[349]
First Trump administration
Main articles: First presidency of Donald Trump and COVID-19 pandemic in the United States
A February 2018 demonstration following the Parkland high school shooting in Parkland, Florida

In November 2016, Donald Trump was elected president.[350] The election's legitimacy was disputed when the FBI and Congress investigated if Russia interfered in the election to help Trump win. There were also accusations of collusion between Trump's campaign and Russian officials. The Mueller report concluded that Russia attempted to help Trump's campaign, but there was no evidence of "explicit" collusion.[351][352][353]

During Trump's presidency, he espoused an "America First" ideology, placing restrictions on asylum seekers, expanding the wall on the U.S.-Mexico border, and banning immigration from seven Muslim-majority countries. Many of his actions were challenged in court.[354][355][356] He confirmed three new Supreme Court justices (cementing a conservative majority),[357] started a trade war with China,[358] signed the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, and removed the U.S. from the Paris Agreement.[349] In 2018, the administration separated families which were illegally immigrating to the country. After public outcry, Trump rescinded the policy.[359][360] A whistleblower complaint alleged that Trump had withheld foreign aid from Ukraine under the demand that they investigate the business dealings of Hunter Biden; Hunter's father, Democrat Joe Biden, would be Trump's opponent in the 2020 presidential election.[361][362] Trump was impeached for abuse of power and obstruction of congress, but was acquitted in 2020.[363]

In the 2010s and early 2020s, Americans became more politically polarized.[364][365][366] The #MeToo movement exposed alleged sexual harassment and abuse in the workplace.[367] Many celebrities were accused of misconduct or rape.[368][369] The Black Lives Matter movement gained support after multiple police killings of African-Americans.[370] White supremacy also grew.[371][372][373] The 2017 Women's March against Trump's presidency was one of the largest protests in American history.[374] Multiple mass shootings, including the 2016 Pulse Nightclub shooting, 2017 Las Vegas shooting, and 2018 Parkland shooting, led to increased calls for gun reform, such as in the March for Our Lives student protest movement.[375][376]

COVID-19 started spreading in China in 2019.[377] In March 2020, the WHO declared a pandemic.[378] American state and local governments imposed stay-at-home orders to slow the virus' spread, reducing patient overload in hospitals. By April, the U.S. had the most cases of any country, at 100,000.[379][380][381] On April 11, the U.S. death toll became the highest in the world at 20,000,[382] and by May 2022, one million had died.[383] Unemployment rates were the highest since the Great Depression.[384][385] The biggest mass vaccination campaign in U.S. history started in December 2020.[386] The May 2020 murder of George Floyd caused mass protests and riots in many cities over police brutality.[387] Many organizations attempted to rid themselves of institutionalized racism.[388] 2020 was also marked by a rise in domestic terrorist threats and widespread conspiracy theories around mail-in voting and COVID-19.[389][390][391] The QAnon conspiracy theory gained publicity.[392][393] Multiple major cities were hit by rioting and fighting between far-left anti-fascist groups and far-right groups like the Proud Boys.[394][395]
Supporters of then-President Trump attempting to stop the counting of electoral votes on January 6, 2021

Joe Biden defeated Trump in the 2020 presidential election.[362] Trump repeatedly made false claims of massive voter fraud and election rigging,[396][397][398] leading to the January 6 United States Capitol attack by supporters of Trump and right-wing militias.[399][400] The attack was widely described as a coup d'état.[401][402][403] It led to Trump's impeachment for incitement of insurrection, making him the only U.S. president to be impeached twice.[404][405][406] The Senate later acquitted Trump, despite some fellow Republicans voting against him.[407][408] Kamala Harris was inaugurated as the first Black, Asian, and female vice president.[409]
Biden administration
Main article: Presidency of Joe Biden

In 2021, Biden completed the withdrawal of American troops from Afghanistan which had started under the first Trump administration. After an evacuation of over 120,000 American citizens, Afghanistan fell to the Taliban in August.[410][411][412] Biden signed into law the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, a $1.9 trillion stimulus bill.[413] He also proposed a significant expansion of the social safety net through the Build Back Better Act, but those efforts, along with voting rights legislation, failed in Congress.[414] He signed bills regarding infrastructure,[415] gun reform,[416] inflation reduction,[417] and healthcare for veterans,[418] among other issues.[419] New preventative restrictions were put in place in reaction to the SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant.[420][421][422]

In 2022, following Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine, the Biden administration provided extensive military and economic aid to Ukraine, approving tens of billions of dollars in assistance and coordinating sanctions against Russia with NATO allies.[423] The U.S. also supplied advanced weaponry, including artillery and missile defense systems, while reinforcing NATO's eastern flank in response to the conflict.[424][425]
Protestors outside the Supreme Court following the Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization decision in June 2022

In the early 2020s, Republican-led states began rollbacks of LGBTQ rights as well as restrictions on voting rights.[426] In 2022, the Supreme Court ruled in Dobbs v. Jackson that the right to have an abortion is not protected by the U.S. Constitution, overturning Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey and sparking nationwide protests.[427][428] Biden appointed Ketanji Brown Jackson to become the first Black woman to serve on the court.[429] In 2023, Trump began appearing in court as a defendant in multiple notable criminal trials.[430][431] Meanwhile, the U.S. began supporting Israel in the Gaza war[432] and protecting shipping in the Red Sea from attacks by the Yemeni Houthis.[433]

In May 2024, Trump became the first former president to be convicted of a crime, when found guilty of 34 felony counts for falsifying business documents related to his paying off of Stormy Daniels.[434] In July, the Supreme Court ruled in Trump v. United States that presidents are somewhat immune from criminal prosecution, aiding Trump prior to his planned election subversion trial.[435][436][437] Later in July, Biden dropped out of the 2024 race and endorsed his running mate Kamala Harris for president.[438] During the election season, there were two assassination attempts on Trump.[439] Trump won the 2024 presidential election.[440][441] Biden delivered his farewell address from the Oval Office on January 15, 2025. He opened by announcing that a hostage release deal had been reached between Israel and Hamas. Additionally, he advocated for continued renewable energy investment, strengthening checks and balances in government, and warned against the dangers of what he termed the 'tech–industrial complex'.[442]
Second Trump administration
Main article: Second presidency of Donald Trump
Trump enacts the One Big Beautiful Bill on July 4, 2025

In November 2024, Trump was elected president to a nonconsecutive second term. The election was certified by Congress on January 6, 2025, and Trump assumed office on January 20.[443] On his first day, Trump pardoned about 1,500 people convicted of offenses in the January 6 Capitol attack of 2021. Within his first month, he signed approximately 70 executive orders (far more than any of his recent predecessors), some of which are being challenged in court.[444] On immigration, he signed executive orders blocking asylum-seekers from entry to the U.S., reinstated the national emergency at the Mexico–U.S. border, designated drug cartels as terrorist organizations, and attempted to end birthright citizenship. He signed the Laken Riley Act as the first legislation of his term. Trump established the Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE), led by the businessman Elon Musk, which is tasked with cutting spending by the federal government, limiting bureaucracy, and which has overseen mass layoffs of civil servants.

In international affairs, Trump withdrew the United States from the World Health Organization and the Paris Climate Accords. He started a trade war with Canada and Mexico and continued the ongoing trade war with China. He has repeatedly expressed interest in annexing Canada, Greenland, and the Panama Canal. In response to the Gaza War, he proposed an American takeover of the Gaza Strip, forcibly relocating the Palestinian population to other Arab states, and rebuilding Gaza into a tourist resort. Amid the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the Trump administration temporarily suspended the provision of intelligence and military aid to Ukraine, offered concessions to Russia, requested half of Ukraine's oil and minerals as repayment for American support, and said that Ukraine bore partial responsibility for the invasion. The administration resumed the aid after Ukraine agreed to a potential ceasefire.[445]
See also

    flagUnited States portal

    Bibliography of American history
    History of North America
    History of the Southern United States
    List of historians by area of study
    List of history journals
    Outline of the history of the United States

By period

    An Indigenous Peoples' History of the United States
    Colonial era
    United States factor

By topic

    Agriculture
    Cities
    Culture
    Economy
    Education
    Foreign policy
    Government
        Presidents
    Immigration
    Military
    Religion
    Sports
    Territorial evolution
    Women

Other topics

    Politics
    Racism
    Territories

Notes

'In addition, he [i.e., Sweyn Estridsson, king of Denmark (reigned 1047–1076)] named one more island in this ocean, discovered by many, which is called "Vinland", because vines grow wild there, making the best wine. For [that] crops [that are] not sown, abound there, we learn not from fanciful opinion but from the true account of the Danes.'[20]
Howe argued that, "American imperialism did not represent an American consensus; it provoked bitter dissent within the national polity."[101]
The Seneca Falls Convention was preceded by the Anti-Slavery Convention of American Women in 1837 held in New York City, at which women's rights issues were debated, especially African-American women's rights.[106]

    A new way of calculating casualties by looking at the deviation of the death rate of men of fighting age from the norm through analysis of census data found that at least 627,000 and at most 888,000 people, but most likely 761,000 people, died through the war.[124][125]

References

Goodlatte says U.S. has the oldest working national constitution, Politifact Virginia website, September 22, 2014.
Milkis.
"New Ideas About Human Migration From Asia To Americas". ScienceDaily. October 29, 2007. Archived from the original on February 25, 2011. Retrieved March 12, 2011.
Outline of American History.
Chenault.
Dumond, D. E. (1969). "Toward a Prehistory of the Na-Dene, with a General Comment on Population Movements among Nomadic Hunters". American Anthropologist. 71 (5): 857–863. doi:10.1525/aa.1969.71.5.02a00050. ISSN 0002-7294. JSTOR 670070.
Leer, Jeff; Hitch, Doug; Ritter, John (2001). Interior Tlingit Noun Dictionary: The Dialects Spoken by Tlingit Elders of Carcross and Teslin, Yukon, and Atlin, British Columbia. Whitehorse, Yukon Territory: Yukon Native Language Centre. ISBN 1-55242-227-5.
"Hopewell". Ohio History Central. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved December 31, 2015.
"Ancestral Pueblo culture". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on April 29, 2015. Retrieved June 4, 2012.
Woods, Thomas E. (2007). 33 questions about American history you're not supposed to ask. Crown Forum. p. 62. ISBN 978-0-307-34668-1. Archived from the original on January 1, 2016. Retrieved December 31, 2015.
Wright, R. (2005). Stolen Continents: 500 Years of Conquest and Resistance in the Americas. Mariner Books. ISBN 978-0-618-49240-4.
Tooker, pp. 107–128.
Burns, L. F. "Osage". Oklahoma Encyclopedia of History and Culture. Archived from the original on January 2, 2011. Retrieved November 29, 2010.
Dye, Thomas S. (2011). "A model-based age estimate for Polynesian colonization of Hawai'i". Archaeology in Oceania. 46 (3): 130–138. doi:10.1002/j.1834-4453.2011.tb00107.x. ISSN 0728-4896.
Kirch, Patrick. "When Did the Polynesians Settle Hawai'i?".
Conte, Eric; Anderson, Atholl (2003). "Radiocarbon Ages for Two Sites on Ua Huka, Marquesas". Asian Perspectives. 42 (1): 155–160. doi:10.1353/asi.2003.0018. hdl:10125/17184. ISSN 1535-8283. S2CID 162470429.
Anderson, Atholl; Leach, Helen; Smith, Ian; Walter, Richard (1994). "Reconsideration of the Marquesan sequence in East Polynesian prehistory, with particular reference to Hane (MUH1)". Archaeology in Oceania. 29 (1): 29–52. doi:10.1002/arco.1994.29.1.29. ISSN 0728-4896.
Fitzpatrick (March 9, 2020). Early mapping of Hawaii. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-72652-4. OCLC 1151955837.
Rouse, Irving (1992). The Tainos : Rise & Decline of the People Who Greeted Columbus. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-05181-6. OCLC 24469325.
von Bremen, Adam (1917). Schmeidler, Bernhard (ed.). Hamburgische Kirchengeschichte [Hamburg's Church History] (in Latin and German). Hannover and Leipzig: Hahnsche. pp. 275–276.
Linden, Eugene. "The Vikings: A Memorable Visit to America". Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved May 28, 2020.
Byrne, Joseph Patrick (2008). Encyclopedia of Pestilence, Pandemics, and Plagues. ABC-CLIO. pp. 415–416. Archived from the original on January 1, 2014. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
Hinderaker, Eric; Horn, Rebecca (2010). "Territorial Crossings: Histories and Historiographies of the Early Americas". The William and Mary Quarterly. 67 (3): 395. doi:10.5309/willmaryquar.67.3.395. JSTOR 10.5309/willmaryquar.67.3.395.
Greenberger, Robert (2003). Juan Ponce de León: the exploration of Florida and the search for the Fountain of Youth.
Pyne, Stephen J. (1998). How the Canyon Became Grand. New York City: Penguin Books. pp. 4–7. ISBN 978-0-670-88110-9.
Day.
Weber, David J. (1979). New Spain's Far Northern Frontier: Essays on Spain in the American West, 1540–1821.
Jacobs.
"Brief History of New Sweden in America". colonialswedes.net. Archived from the original on September 21, 2021. Retrieved July 18, 2020.
"The Finns in America. The First Settlers". genealogia.fi. Archived from the original on October 1, 2020. Retrieved July 18, 2020.
Butler, James Davie (1896). "British Convicts Shipped to American Colonies". American Historical Review. 2 (1): 12–33. doi:10.2307/1833611. JSTOR 1833611.; Keneally, Thomas (2005). The Commonwealth of Thieves. Sydney: Random House.
Mintz, Steven. "Death in Early America". Digital History. Archived from the original on December 30, 2010. Retrieved February 15, 2011.
Middleton and Lombard.
Kidd, Thomas S. (2009). The Great Awakening: The Roots of Evangelical Christianity in Colonial America. Bedford/St. Martin's. ISBN 9780312452254.
Savelle, pp. 185–190.
Barker, Deanna. "Indentured Servitude in Colonial America". National Association for Interpretation, Cultural Interpretation and Living History Section. Archived from the original on October 22, 2009.
Corbett et al.
Encarta Online.
Brands, H.W. (2010). The First American: The Life and Times of Benjamin Franklin. Random House Digital, Inc. pp. 232–240, 510–512. ISBN 9780307754943. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
Morgan, Edmund S. (2012) [1956]. The Birth of the Republic, 1763–89 (4th ed.). U. of Chicago Press. pp. 14–27. ISBN 9780226923420. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
Allison, Robert (2007). The Boston Tea Party. Applewood Books. pp. 47–63. ISBN 9781933212111. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
Hamowy, Ronald (2000). "The Declaration of Independence". In Pole, J. R.; Greene, J. P. (eds.). A Companion to the American Revolution (1st ed.). Blackwell. pp. 258–261. doi:10.1002/9780470756454. ISBN 9780631210580.
Wood, Gordon S. (1990). "Classical Republicanism and the American Revolution". Chicago-Kent Law Review. 66: 13.
"Today in History - July 4". Library of Congress. Archived from the original on October 29, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2023.
Conroy, David W. (2000). "Development of a revolutionary organization, 1765–1775". In Pole, J. R.; Greene, J. P. (eds.). A Companion to the American Revolution (1st ed.). Blackwell. pp. 216–221. doi:10.1002/9780470756454. ISBN 9780631210580.
Freeman, Douglas S. (1948). George Washington: A Biography. Augustus M. Kelley. p. 42. ISBN 9780678028346.
Cogliano 2009, pp. 101–102.
Snow, Dean R. (2016). 1777: Tipping Point at Saratoga. Oxford University Press. pp. 7–9. ISBN 9780190618759.
Jones, Howard (2001). Crucible of power: a history of American foreign relations to 1913. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 12. ISBN 9780842029186.
Lumpkin, Henry (1981). From Savannah to Yorktown: The American Revolution in the South. University of South Carolina Press. pp. 27–30. ISBN 978-0-87249-408-4.
Cogliano 2009, p. 110.
Morris, Richard Brandon (1965). The Peacemakers: The Great Powers and American Independence (1st ed.). Harper & Row. pp. 411–412.
"Treaty of Paris (1783)". National Archives. May 10, 2022. Archived from the original on October 31, 2022. Retrieved April 28, 2023.
"The Confederation Congress's Ratification of the "Treaty of Paris"". US House of Representatives: History, Art & Archives. Archived from the original on November 3, 2022.
Van Cleve, George William (2019). We Have Not a Government: The Articles of Confederation and the Road to the Constitution. University of Chicago Press. pp. 2–7. ISBN 9780226641522. Archived from the original on January 20, 2023. Retrieved November 3, 2022.
Greene & Pole (2003).
Grenier, John (2005). The First Way of War: American War Making on the Frontier, 1607–1814. Cambridge University Press. pp. 146–148. ISBN 9781139444705. Archived from the original on January 20, 2023. Retrieved November 6, 2022.
Herring, George (2008). From Colony to Superpower: U.S. Foreign Relations Since 1776. Oxford University Press. pp. 43–44, 61–62. ISBN 9780199743773.
Taylor, Alan (2016). American Revolutions: A Continental History, 1750-1804. W. W. Norton & Company. p. 343. ISBN 978-0-393-25387-0.
Countryman, Edward (1985). The American Revolution. Macmillan. pp. 193–196. ISBN 978-0-8090-2563-3.
Berkin, Carol (2002). A Brilliant Solution: Inventing the American Constitution. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 192. ISBN 978-0-15-602872-1.
McDonald, Forrest (1974). The Presidency of George Washington. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 9780700601103.
Labunski, Richard (2008). James Madison and the Struggle for the Bill of Rights.
Smelser, Marshall (1959). "The Jacobin Phrenzy: The Menace of Monarchy, Plutocracy, and Anglophilia, 1789–1798". The Review of Politics. 21 (1): 239–258. doi:10.1017/S003467050002204X. JSTOR 1405347. S2CID 144230619.
Miller.
Lesson Plan on Washington.
"George Washington's Farewell Address". Archiving Early America. Archived from the original on May 27, 2008. Retrieved June 7, 2008.
McCullough, David (2008). "10". John Adams.
Kolchin, Peter (1993). American Slavery, 1619–1877. New York: Hill and Wang. pp. 79–81.
"Interview: James Oliver Horton: Exhibit Reveals History of Slavery in New York City". PBS Newshour. January 25, 2007. Archived from the original on December 23, 2013. Retrieved February 11, 2012.
Ahlstrom, Sydney (1972). A Religious History of the American People. pp. 415–471.
Smith, Timothy L. (1957). Revivalism and Social Reform: American Protestantism on the Eve of the Civil War. Harper Torchbooks.
Wood, Empire of Liberty, pp. 368–374.
Ambrose, Stephen E. (1997). Undaunted Courage: Meriwether Lewis, Thomas Jefferson, and the Opening of the American West. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 9780684811079.
Smith, Jean Edward (1998). John Marshall: Definer of a Nation. Macmillan. pp. 309–326. ISBN 9780805055108.
Stagg, Madison's War, p. 4.
Carlisle, Rodney P.; Golson, J. Geoffrey, eds. (2007). Manifest Destiny and the Expansion of America. ABC-CLIO. p. 44. ISBN 9781851098330.
Pratt, Julius W. (1925). Expansionists of 1812.
Heidler, David; Heidler, Jeanne T. The War of 1812. p. 4.
Tucker, Spencer. The Encyclopedia of the War of 1812. p. 236.
Wood, Empire of Liberty, pp. 660–672.
""We have met the enemy and they are ours"". U.S. National Park Service. Archived from the original on August 18, 2018. Retrieved August 18, 2018.
Smelser, Marshall (March 1969). "Tecumseh, Harrison, and the War of 1812". Indiana Magazine of History. 65 (1): 25–44. Archived from the original on March 25, 2020.
Stagg, War of 1812, pp. 152–153.
Remini, Robert V. (2008). A Short history of the United States (1st ed.). New York: HarperCollins Publishers. pp. 74–75. ISBN 978-0-06-083144-8. OCLC 167504400.
Langguth, A.J. (2006). "24: Afterward (1815–1861)". Union 1812: The Americans Who Fought the Second War of Independence. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 9780743226189.
Banner, James (1969). To the Hartford Convention: the Federalists and the Origins of Party Politics in Massachusetts, 1789–1815.
Dangerfield.
Goodman, pp. 56–89.
Gilderhus, Mark T. (March 2006). "The Monroe Doctrine: Meanings and Implications". Presidential Studies Quarterly. 36 (1): 5–16. doi:10.1111/j.1741-5705.2006.00282.x.
"Andrew Jackson". North Carolina History Project. Archived from the original on January 27, 2016.
Norton et al.
Hine, Robert V.; Faragher, John Mack (2008). Frontiers: A Short History of the American West.
Lamar, Howard R., ed. (1998). The New Encyclopedia of the American West.
Hine and Faragher, American West, p. 10.
Heidler, David; Heidler, Jeanne T. (2006). Indian Removal.
Remini, Robert Vincent (2002). Andrew Jackson and His Indian Wars.
Stannard 1993, p. 124.
Thornton, pp. 75–93.
McPherson 1988, pp. 41–46.
Howe, p. 798.
Hine and Faragher, American West.
Madley, Benjamin (2016). An American Genocide: The United States and the California Indian Catastrophe, 1846–1873.
Unruh, John David (1993). The Plains Across: The Overland Emigrants on the Trans-Mississippi West, 1840–1860. University of Illinois Press. p. 120. ISBN 978-0-252-06360-2.
Vandermeer, John (2011). The Ecology of Agroecosystems. Jones & Bartlett Learning. p. 149. ISBN 9780763771539.
Gordon, Ann D.; Collier-Thomas, Bettye (1997). "Introduction". African American women and the vote, 1837–1965. University of Massachusetts Press. pp. 2–9. ISBN 978-1-55849-059-8.
Mead, Rebecca J. (2006). How the Vote Was Won: Woman Suffrage in the Western United States, 1868–1914.
Forret, Jeff (2012). Slavery in the United States. Facts on File.
"The Southern Argument for Slavery". USHistory.org. Archived from the original on June 8, 2017. Retrieved June 3, 2017.
"The Compromise of 1850". USHistory.org. Archived from the original on June 2, 2017. Retrieved June 3, 2017.
Rotunda, Ronald D. (1992). Treatise on constitutional law : substance and procedure. West Pub. Co. ISBN 0-314-00805-5. OCLC 769785178.
"Republican Party Platform of 1860". The American Presidency Project. Retrieved September 22, 2022.
Bordewich, Fergus M. (2012). America's Great Debate: Henry Clay, Stephen A. Douglas, and the Compromise That Preserved the Union.
Etcheson, Nicole (2006). Bleeding Kansas: Contested Liberty in the Civil War Era.
"Confederate States of America - History, President, Map, Facts, & Flag". Britannica.com. May 28, 2024. Retrieved June 12, 2024.
Guelzo, Fateful Lightning.
Stampp, Kenneth (2008). The Causes of the Civil War.
Woodworth, Stephen E. (2011). Decision in the Heartland: The Civil War in the West.
Catton, Bruce (1962). The Army of the Potomac: Mr. Lincoln's Army.
McPherson, James M. "To Conquer a Peace?". Civil War Times. Vol. 46, no. 2. pp. 26–33.
"The New York City Draft Riots of 1863". press.uchicago.edu. Retrieved September 24, 2022.
Guelzo, Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation.
Huddleston, John (2002). Killing Ground: The Civil War and the Changing American Landscape. JHU Press. p. 3. ISBN 9780801867736.
Hacker, J. David (September 20, 2011). "Recounting the Dead". New York Times. Archived from the original on December 20, 2017.
Hacker, J. David (2011). "A census-based count of the Civil War dead". Civil War History. 57 (4): 307–348. doi:10.1353/cwh.2011.0061. PMID 22512048. S2CID 30195230.
Downs, Jim (2015). Sick from Freedom: African-American Illness and Suffering during the Civil War and Reconstruction.
Foner, Eric (1990). A Short History of Reconstruction. Harper & Row. ISBN 9780060964313.
Summers, Mark Wahlgren (2014). The Ordeal of the Reunion: A New History of Reconstruction.
"Reconstruction - Definition, Summary, Timeline & Facts". Britannica.com. June 5, 2024. Retrieved June 12, 2024.
"Assassination of Abraham Lincoln - Summary, Conspirators, Trial, Impact, & Facts". Britannica.com. May 28, 2024. Retrieved June 12, 2024.
"The First Measured Century: An Illustrated Guide to Trends in America, 1900–2000". Public Broadcasting Service (PBS). Archived from the original on August 15, 2017.
Cimbala, Paul A. (2005). The Freedmen's Bureau: Reconstructing the American South after the Civil War.
"Thirteenth Amendment - Definition, Significance, & Facts". Britannica.com. Retrieved June 12, 2024.
"Fourteenth Amendment - Definition, Summary, Rights, Significance, & Facts". Britannica.com. May 8, 2024. Retrieved June 12, 2024.
"Fifteenth Amendment - Definition, Significance, & Facts". Britannica.com. May 2, 2024. Retrieved June 12, 2024.
Rable.
Vann Woodward.
"Jim Crow Laws - Causes and Effects". Britannica.com. Retrieved June 12, 2024.
Ayers, Edward L. (1992). The Promise of the New South: Life After Reconstruction. Oxford University Press. pp. 3–54. ISBN 978-0-19-503756-2.
Anderson, David L. (1978). "The Diplomacy of Discrimination: Chinese Exclusion, 1876–1882". California History. 57 (1): 32–45. doi:10.2307/25157814. JSTOR 25157814.
Roger Daniels and Otis L. Graham, Debating American Immigration, 1882–present (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2001), 14.
Trachtenberg, Alan (2007). The Incorporation of America: Culture and Society in the Gilded Age.
Pettigrew, Richard Franklin (2010). Triumphant Plutocracy: The Story of American Public Life from 1870 to 1920. Nabu Press. ISBN 978-1146542746.
Schlup, Leonard; Ryan, James G., eds. (2003). Historical dictionary of the Gilded Age. Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe. p. 145. ISBN 978-0765603319., (foreword by Vincent P. De Santis)
Beard.
Piketty, Thomas (2014). Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Belknap Press. pp. 348–349. ISBN 978-0674430006.
"Growth of U.S. Population". TheUSAonline.com. Archived from the original on January 23, 2010.
Bacon, Katie (June 12, 2007). "The Dark Side of the Gilded Age". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on December 23, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2014.
Zinn, pp. 264–282.
Fraser, Steve (2015). The Age of Acquiescence: The Life and Death of American Resistance to Organized Wealth and Power. Little, Brown and Company. p. 66. ISBN 978-0-316-18543-1.
Mintz, Steven (2006). "Learn About the Progressive Era". Digital History. University of Houston. Archived from the original on October 12, 2007. Retrieved February 6, 2008.
"James A. Garfield - 20th President, Assassination, Civil War". Britannica.com. Retrieved June 9, 2024.
Mintz, Steven (June 5, 2008). "Learn About the Gilded Age". Digital History. University of Houston. Archived from the original on May 16, 2008. Retrieved June 5, 2008.
Hoffmann, Charles (1956). "The Depression of the Nineties". The Journal of Economic History. 16 (2): 137–164. doi:10.1017/S0022050700058629. JSTOR 2114113. S2CID 155082457.
Sebakijje, Lena. "Research Guides: Eugene Debs: Topics in Chronicling America: Introduction". guides.loc.gov. Retrieved September 24, 2023.
Miller, Worth Robert (1993). "A Centennial Historiography of American Populism". Kansas History. 16 (1): 54–69. Archived from the original on July 2, 2010.
Harpine, William D. (2006). From the Front Porch to the Front Page: McKinley and Bryan in the 1896 Presidential Campaign. Texas A&M University Press. pp. 176–186. ISBN 9781585445592. Archived from the original on September 29, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
Morgan, H. Wayne (1966). "William McKinley as a Political Leader". The Review of Politics. 28 (4): 417–432. doi:10.1017/S0034670500013188. JSTOR 1405280. S2CID 145544412.
"William McKinley - Biography, Presidency, Assassination, & Facts". Britannica.com. May 28, 2024. Retrieved June 9, 2024.
Kazin, Michael; et al. (2011). The Concise Princeton Encyclopedia of American Political Turn up History. Princeton University Press. p. 181. ISBN 9781400839469. Archived from the original on May 19, 2016. Retrieved November 29, 2018.
"Credit Union History". Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved November 29, 2018.
"A Thing Well Begun Is Half Done". Persuasive Maps: PJ Mode Collection. Cornell University. Archived from the original on July 26, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1894). Report on Indians taxed and Indians not taxed in the United States (except Alaska). Norman Ross Pub. p. 637. ISBN 9780883544624. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
Paterson, Thomas G. (1996). "United States Intervention in Cuba, 1898: Interpretations of the Spanish-American-Cuban-Filipino War". The History Teacher. 29 (3): 341–361. doi:10.2307/494551. JSTOR 494551.
Harrington, Fred H. (1935). "The Anti-Imperialist Movement in the United States, 1898–1900". The Mississippi Valley Historical Review. 22 (2): 211–230. doi:10.2307/1898467. JSTOR 1898467.
Stanley, pp. 269–272.
Jensen et al.
"Suffragists Parade Down Fifth Avenue – 1917". The New York Times. 1917. Archived from the original on January 6, 2015. Retrieved August 17, 2017.
Riley 2001, p. ?.
Kraditor, Aileen S. (1967). The Ideas of the Woman Suffrage Movement: 1890–1920.
Adams, Katherine H.; Keene, Michael L. (2007). Alice Paul and the American Suffrage Campaign.
Frost-Knappman, Elizabeth; Cullen-Dupont, Kathryn (2004). Women's Suffrage in America.
Dumenil, Lynn (1995). The Modern Temper: American Culture and Society in the 1920s. Macmillan. pp. 98–144. ISBN 9780809069781.
Andersen, Kristi (1996). After Suffrage: Women in Partisan and Electoral Politics before the New Deal. University of Chicago. ISBN 9780226019574.
McNabb, James B. (2005). "Germany's Decision for Unrestricted Submarine Warfare and Its Impact on the U.S. Declaration of War". In Roberts, Priscilla Mary; Tucker, Spencer (eds.). World War I: Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. pp. 482–483. ISBN 9781851094202. Archived from the original on October 7, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
Coffman.
"American Political Prisoners: Prosecutions under the Espionage and Sedition Acts. By Stephen M. Kohn. (Westport: Praeger, 1994. xviii, ISBN 0-275-94415-8.)". Journal of American History. 82 (4): 1688. March 1, 1996. doi:10.1093/jahist/82.4.1688-a. ISSN 0021-8723.
Cooper.
"Feature: World War I and isolationism, 1913–33". U.S. Department of State. April 29, 1991. Archived from the original on January 2, 2009.
Carlisle, Rodney P. (2009). Handbook to Life in America. Infobase Publishing. p. 245ff. ISBN 9781438119014. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
"History of 1918 Flu Pandemic". CDC. January 22, 2019.
"Influenza pandemic of 1918–19 - Cause, Origin, & Spread". Britannica.com. April 15, 2024. Retrieved June 9, 2024.
"Roaring Twenties - Definition, Music, History, & Facts". Britannica.com. Retrieved June 9, 2024.
"Prohibition - Definition, History, Eighteenth Amendment, & Repeal". Britannica.com. April 10, 2024. Retrieved June 9, 2024.
Kennedy, Freedom from Fear.
Shlaes 2008, pp. 85, 90
Kennedy, David M. (Summer 2009). "What the New Deal Did". Political Science Quarterly. 124 (2): 251–268. doi:10.1002/j.1538-165X.2009.tb00648.x.
Black, Conrad (2003). Roosevelt: Champion of Freedom. Public Affairs. pp. 648–682. ISBN 9781586481841.
Prange, Gordon W.; Goldstein, Donald M.; Dillon, Katherine V. (1982). At Dawn We Slept: The Untold Story of Pearl Harbor. McGraw-Hill. ISBN 9780070506695.
"Short History of Amache Japanese Internment Camp" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on April 12, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2018.
Ogawa and Fox, p. 135.
Richey, Warren (December 5, 2007). "Key Guantánamo cases hit Supreme Court". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018.
"World War II 1939–1945". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved June 7, 2024.
Hoopes, Townsend; Brinkley, Douglas (1997). FDR and the Creation of the U.N.. Yale University Press. p. 100. ISBN 978-0-300-08553-2.
Gaddis, John Lewis (1972). The United States and the Origins of the Cold War, 1941–1947. Columbia University Press. p. 25. ISBN 978-0-231-12239-9.
Vatter, Harold G. (1988). The U.S. Economy in World War II. pp. 27–31.
Kennedy, Freedom from Fear, pp. 615–668.
"Normandy Invasion World War II". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved June 7, 2024.
"Franklin D. Roosevelt - Accomplishments, New Deal, Great Depression, World War II, & Death". Britannica.com. May 23, 2024. Retrieved June 12, 2024.
"The Largest Naval Battles in Military History: A Closer Look at the Largest and Most Influential Naval Battles in World History". Military History. Norwich University. Archived from the original on January 24, 2015. Retrieved March 7, 2015.
Philippine Republic Day, Official Gazette (Philippines), archived from the original on July 29, 2021, retrieved July 5, 2012
Rhodes, Richard (1995). The Making of the Atomic Bomb.
"Ralph Smith's eyewitness account of the Trinity trip to watch blast". White Sands Missile Range, Public Affairs Office. Archived from the original on September 4, 2014. Retrieved August 24, 2014.
Spector, Ronald H. (1985). "12–18". Eagle Against the Sun. Vintage Books. ISBN 9780394741017.
Giangreco, D. M. (2009). Hell to Pay: Operation DOWNFALL and the Invasion of Japan, 1945–1947.
Finn, Richard B. (1992). Winners in Peace: MacArthur, Yoshida, and Postwar Japan. University of California Press. pp. 43–103. ISBN 9780520069091.
Leland, Anne; Oboroceanu, Mari–Jana (February 26, 2010). "American War and Military Operations Casualties: Lists and Statistics" (PDF). Congressional Research Service. p. 2. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 9, 2018. Retrieved February 18, 2011.
Gaddis, Long Peace.
Getchell, Michelle (October 26, 2017). "The United Nations and the United States". Oxford Research Encyclopedia of American History. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780199329175.013.497. ISBN 978-0-19-932917-5. Retrieved September 24, 2022.
Gaddis, Origins of the Cold War.
"Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) | History, Organization, Responsibilities, Activities, & Criticism | Britannica". britannica.com. July 19, 2024. Retrieved July 21, 2024.
Blakeley, Ruth (2009). State Terrorism and Neoliberalism: The North in the South. Routledge. pp. 85-96. ISBN 978-0415686174.
"What was the Cold War—and are we headed to another one?". Culture. March 23, 2022. Retrieved June 8, 2024.
Gaddis, Cold War.
"McCarthyism - Definition, History, & Facts". Britannica.com. Retrieved June 8, 2024.
Haynes, Suyin; Aneja, Arpita (December 22, 2020). "The Anti-Gay 'Lavender Scare' Is Rarely Taught in Schools". TIME. Retrieved August 14, 2024.
Hitchcock, William I. (2018). The Age of Eisenhower: America and the World in the 1950s. Simon and Schuster. pp. xvi–xix. ISBN 9781451698428.
Hitchcock, William I. (2018). The Age of Eisenhower. Simon & Schuster. p. 109. ISBN 9781451698428.
The Unfinished Journey: America Since World War II by William H. Chafe
"Baby boomer - Definition, Age Range, & Societal and Economic Impact". Britannica.com. May 27, 2024. Retrieved June 8, 2024.
Peters, Frederick (August 14, 2019). "The Rise And Fall Of The Suburbs". Forbes. Retrieved June 7, 2024.
"American civil rights movement - Montgomery Bus Boycott, Nonviolent Resistance, Voting Rights Act". Britannica.com. Retrieved June 8, 2024.
Patterson, Grand Expectations.
O'Brien, Michael (2005). John F. Kennedy: A Biography.
Schneider, Gregory (2009). "5". The Conservative Century: From Reaction to Revolution. Rowman & Littlefield.
Alterman, Eric; Mattson, Kevin (2012). The Cause: The Fight for American Liberalism from Franklin Roosevelt to Barack Obama. Viking. ISBN 9780670023431.
Dallek, Robert (2004). Lyndon B. Johnson: Portrait of a President.
Bernstein, Irving (1994). Guns or Butter: The Presidency of Lyndon Johnson.
Dierenfield, Bruce J. (2004). The Civil Rights Movement. Pearson Longman. ISBN 9780582357372.
Jacobs, Elizabeth (2006). Mexican American Literature: The Politics of Identity. Routledge. p. 13. ISBN 9781134218233. Archived from the original on March 20, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
Chapman, Roger (2009). Culture Wars: An Encyclopedia of Issues, Voices, and Viewpoints.
Joseph, Peniel E. (2001). "Black Liberation without Apology: Reconceptualizing the Black Power Movement". The Black Scholar. 31 (3–4): 2–19. doi:10.1080/00064246.2001.11431152. S2CID 142923969.
"The Riots of the Long, Hot Summer". Britannica.com. Retrieved June 2, 2024.
Lupo, Lindsey (2010). Flak-Catchers: One Hundred Years of Riot Commission Politics in America. Lexington Books. pp. 123–124. ISBN 9780739138120. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
"How the Stonewall uprising ignited the pride movement". History. June 1, 2023. Retrieved June 2, 2024.
Zophy.
Critchlow, Donald T. (2005). Phyllis Schlafly and Grassroots Conservatism: A Woman's Crusade.
Mansbridge, Jane J. (1986). Why We Lost the ERA. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 9780226503585.
John Greene.
Rothman, Lily (March 22, 2017). "Here's Why the Environmental Protection Agency Was Created". TIME. Retrieved June 2, 2024.
"Pardoning Nixon". education.nationalgeographic.org. Retrieved June 2, 2024.
Tremlett, Giles (September 3, 2020). "Operation Condor: the cold war conspiracy that terrorised South America". The Guardian. Retrieved November 25, 2023.
Good, Aaron (2022). American Exception. New York: Skyhorse Publishing. pp. 231–232, 237. ISBN 978-1510769137.
Bevins, Vincent (2020). The Jakarta Method: Washington's Anticommunist Crusade and the Mass Murder Program that Shaped Our World. PublicAffairs. pp. 200–206. ISBN 978-1-5417-4240-6.
Derthick, Martha (1985). The Politics of Deregulation.
"Computer - Home Use, Microprocessors, Software". Britannica.com. Retrieved June 1, 2024.
"People & Events: The Election of 1976". American Experience. PBS. Archived from the original on May 19, 2009. Retrieved January 31, 2010.
Urofsky, Melvin I. (2000). The American Presidents. Taylor & Francis. p. 545. ISBN 978-0-8153-2184-2. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
Caplow, Theodore; Bahr, Howard M.; Chadwick, Bruce A.; John Modell (1994). Recent Social Trends in the United States, 1960–1990. McGill-Queen's Press. p. 337. ISBN 9780773512122. Archived from the original on January 2, 2016. Retrieved October 27, 2015.
"Effective Federal Tax Rates: 1979–2001". Bureau of Economic Analysis. July 10, 2007. Archived from the original on May 9, 2007. Retrieved April 2, 2012.
Gerstle, Gary (2022). The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order: America and the World in the Free Market Era. Oxford University Press. pp. 121–128. ISBN 978-0197519646.
Bartel, Fritz (2022). The Triumph of Broken Promises: The End of the Cold War and the Rise of Neoliberalism. Harvard University Press. pp. 18–19. ISBN 9780674976788.
Wilentz, pp. 140–141.
"The United States Unemployment Rate". Miseryindex.us. November 8, 2008. Archived from the original on September 20, 2008. Retrieved January 31, 2010.
Wilentz, p. 170.
Mitchell, Don (2020). Mean Streets: Homelessness, Public Space, and the Limits of Capital. University of Georgia Press. p. 62. ISBN 9-780-8203-5690-7.
Patterson, James T. (2005). Restless Giant: The United States from Watergate to Bush V. Gore. Oxford University Press. pp. 166–167. ISBN 978-0-19-512216-9.
"War on Drugs - History & Mass Incarceration". Britannica.com. May 27, 2024. Retrieved June 2, 2024.
"50-year war on drugs imprisoned millions of Black Americans". PBS NewsHour. July 26, 2021. Retrieved June 1, 2024.
"Crack epidemic - US History, Causes & Effects". Britannica.com. April 16, 2024. Retrieved June 2, 2024.
Lopez, German (December 1, 2015). "The Reagan administration's unbelievable response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic". Vox. Retrieved June 1, 2024.
Lawson, Richard (December 1, 2015). "The Reagan Administration's Unearthed Response to the AIDS Crisis Is Chilling". Vanity Fair. Retrieved June 1, 2024.
Zelizer, Julian E. (2010). Arsenal of Democracy: The Politics of National Security—From World War II to the War on Terrorism. Basic Books. p. 350. ISBN 9780465015078. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
Ehrman, John; Flamm, Michael W. (2009). Debating the Reagan Presidency. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 101–182. ISBN 9780742570573. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
"Cold War - Summary, Causes, History, Years, Timeline, & Facts". Britannica.com. May 30, 2024. Retrieved June 1, 2024.
Wilentz, pp. 400–401.
"Somalia intervention | UN Peacekeeping, US Military & Humanitarian Aid | Britannica". britannica.com. Retrieved July 21, 2024.
"Operation Just Cause | Summary, Panama, Casualties, & Rock Music | Britannica". britannica.com. Retrieved July 21, 2024.
"Decision to Intervene: How the War in Bosnia Ended". Brookings. Retrieved July 21, 2024.
"Los Angeles Riots of 1992 | Summary, Deaths, & Facts | Britannica". britannica.com. June 24, 2024. Retrieved July 21, 2024.
Wilentz, p. 400.
Salus, Peter H. (1995). Casting the net : from ARPANET to Internet and beyond. Addison-Wesley Pub. Co. ISBN 0-201-87674-4. OCLC 31754973.
Bunyan, Rachael (September 20, 2019). "25 Years After 'Operation Uphold Democracy,' Experts Say the Oft-Forgotten U.S. Military Intervention Still Shapes Life in Haiti". TIME. Retrieved July 21, 2024.
"Kosovo conflict | Summary & Facts | Britannica". britannica.com. Retrieved July 21, 2024.
Glass, Andrew (November 8, 2007). "Congress runs into 'Republican Revolution' Nov. 8, 1994". Politico. Retrieved June 1, 2024.
"Completing the Revolution". archive.nytimes.com. Retrieved June 1, 2024.
"How Newt Gingrich Shaped The Republican Party". wbur.org. July 7, 2020. Retrieved June 1, 2024.
Zelizer, Julian E. (July 7, 2020). "How Newt Gingrich Laid the Groundwork for Trump's Republican Party". TIME. Retrieved June 2, 2024.
DeVroy, Ann. "Clinton's Move to Center hasn't Spurred Ratings". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 2, 2024. Retrieved June 1, 2024.
"United States presidential election of 1996 - Clinton vs. Dole, History, & Facts". Britannica.com. May 31, 2024. Retrieved June 2, 2024.
"Dot-com bubble - Definition, History, & Facts". Britannica.com. Retrieved July 6, 2024.
Geier, Ben (March 12, 2015). "What Did We Learn From the Dotcom Stock Bubble of 2000?". TIME. Retrieved July 6, 2024.
Wilentz, pp. 420–427.
"Election and voting information". FEC.gov. Retrieved September 24, 2022.
"Deadliest terrorist attacks worldwide from 1970 to January 2024", Statista, February 19, 2025
"September 11 attacks - History, Summary, Location, Timeline, Casualties, & Facts". Britannica.com. May 20, 2024. Retrieved June 2, 2024.
"How many people were killed in the September 11 attacks?". Britannica.com. Retrieved June 2, 2024.
Sanger, David E. (2012). "1–5". Confront and Conceal: Obama's Secret Wars and Surprising Use of American Power. Crown Publishers. ISBN 9780307718020.
"Bin Laden's Tora Bora escape, just months after 9/11". BBC News. July 21, 2011. Retrieved June 12, 2024.
Zelizer, Julian E., ed. (2010). The Presidency of George W. Bush: A First Historical Assessment. pp. 59–87.
"Report Details Alleged Abuse of Guantanamo Bay, Abu Ghraib Detainees". PBS NewsHour. June 18, 2008. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 1, 2014.
"What We Do: Guantanamo". Center for Constitutional Rights. Retrieved May 28, 2020. "Since the prison opened in 2002, CCR has been at the forefront of the legal battle against indefinite detention and torture at Guantánamo, representing many current and former detainees."
"US: Prolonged Indefinite Detention Violates International Law: Current Detention Practices at Guantanamo Unjustified and Arbitrary". Human Rights Watch. January 24, 2011.
"CIA's final report: No WMD found in Iraq". NBC News. Associated Press. April 25, 2005. Archived from the original on March 5, 2013. Retrieved April 22, 2008.
Zelizer, Julian, ed. (2010). The Presidency of George W. Bush: A First Historical Assessment. pp. 88–113.
Clifton, Eli (November 7, 2011). "Poll: 62 Percent Say Iraq War Wasn't Worth Fighting". ThinkProgress. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved February 24, 2012.
Milbank, Dana; Deane, Claudia (June 8, 2005). "Poll Finds Dimmer View of Iraq War". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on February 21, 2011. Retrieved October 10, 2010.
"Hurricane Katrina - Deaths, Damage, & Facts". Britannica.com. June 3, 2024. Retrieved June 12, 2024.
Wilentz, p. 453.
Payne, Thomas (2012). The Great Recession: What Happened.
Rosenberg, Jerry M. (2012). The Concise Encyclopedia of The Great Recession 2007–2012 (2nd ed.). Scarecrow Press. ISBN 9780810883406. Archived from the original on March 20, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
Kolb, Robert W. (2011). The Financial Crisis of Our Time. Oxford University Press. p. 96ff. ISBN 9780199792788. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
Riley, Charles (February 3, 2011). "Treasury close to profit on TARP bank loans". CNN Money. Archived from the original on March 9, 2011. Retrieved March 1, 2011.
"'I'd Approve TARP Again': George W. Bush". November 5, 2010. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015.
"Barack Obama: Face Of New Multiracial Movement?". NPR. November 12, 2008. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
Crotty, William (2009). "Policy and Politics: The Bush Administration and the 2008 Presidential Election". Polity. 41 (3): 282–311. doi:10.1057/pol.2009.3. S2CID 154471046.
"Don't Ask, Don't Tell (DADT)". Britannica.com. June 29, 2024. Retrieved July 6, 2024.
Bernstein, Jared (February 18, 2019). "Lessons from the Recovery Act on its 10-year anniversary". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 6, 2024.
"Economic Analysis of the Car Allowance Rebate System ("Cash for clunkers")". The White House. Retrieved July 6, 2024.
Buttle, Rhett. "14 Years Of The Affordable Care Act: What It Means For Entrepreneurs". Forbes. Retrieved July 6, 2024.
Appelbaum, Binyamin; Herszenhorn, David M. (July 15, 2010). "Financial Overhaul Signals Shift on Deregulation". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved July 6, 2024.
Cooper, Helene (July 21, 2010). "Obama Signs Overhaul of Financial System". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved July 6, 2024.
"Great Recession, great recovery? Trends from the Current Population Survey". Monthly Labor Review. Bureau of Labor Statistics. April 2018.
"Occupy Wall Street, Tea Party: United In Distrust". NPR. October 22, 2011. Retrieved July 6, 2024.
Kaiser, Emily (September 20, 2010). "Recession ended in June 2009: NBER". Reuters. Archived from the original on December 19, 2010. Retrieved July 1, 2017.
"Congress Ends 2011 Mired in Gridlock". InvestorPlace. December 22, 2011. Archived from the original on January 4, 2012. Retrieved February 24, 2012.
Khimm, Suzy (September 14, 2012). "The sequester, explained". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 1, 2024.
Rushe, Dominic (April 29, 2020). "US economy shrinks 4.8% as coronavirus ends longest expansion in history". The Guardian.
Bayly, Lucy (April 29, 2020). "GDP falls by 4.8 percent, bringing longest economic expansion on record to abrupt halt". NBC News.
Long, Heather (May 3, 2019). "U.S. unemployment fell to 3.6 percent, lowest since 1969". The Washington Post.
Lowrey, Annie (February 7, 2020). "The Great Affordability Crisis Breaking America". The Atlantic.
Simon, Scott (February 15, 2020). "The U.S. Is In The Midst Of An Affordability Crisis, 'Atlantic' Writer Argues". Weekend Edition Saturday NPR.
Baker, Peter (December 11, 2014). "Obama Catches Blame on Tactics of Torture That He Ended". The New York Times.
Barela, Steven J. (February 12, 2016). "The New US Anti-Torture Law: A Genuine Step Forward". Just Security.
Shane, Scott (January 22, 2009). "Obama Orders Secret Prisons and Detention Camps Closed". The New York Times.
Savage, Charlie (January 25, 2017). "Trump Poised to Lift Ban on C.I.A. 'Black Site' Prisons". The New York Times.
Rath, Arun (January 19, 2017). "Trump Inherits Guantanamo's Remaining Detainees". Morning Edition.
"Why Obama failed to close Guantanamo". NewsHour. PBS. January 14, 2017.
"'The war is over': Last US soldiers leave Iraq". NBC News. December 18, 2011. Archived from the original on March 1, 2016.
Dyke, Joe (May 16, 2024). "NATO Killed Civilians in Libya. It's Time to Admit It". Foreign Policy. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
Baker, Peter; Cooper, Helene; Mazzetti, Mark (May 1, 2011). "Bin Laden Is Dead, Obama Says". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 5, 2011. Retrieved February 27, 2017.
Bergen, Peter L. (2012). Manhunt: The Ten-Year Search for Bin Laden—from 9/11 to Abbottabad. pp. 250–261.
"EXCLUSIVE: Inside the Green Berets' hunt for brutal warlord". NBC News. March 6, 2017. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
"Congress' Job Approval Falls to 11% Amid Gov't Shutdown". Gallup.com. October 7, 2013. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 1, 2014.
"4 Years After Sandy Hook, Obama Leaves a Legacy of Little Progress on Gun Laws". ABC News. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
"10th anniversary of Boston Marathon bombing marked with somber ceremony". PBS NewsHour. April 15, 2023. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
"Blindsided: Hours before the coup in Niger, U.S. diplomats said the country was stable". NBC News. August 14, 2023. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
"US to send 400 troops to train Syrian rebels". BBC News. January 16, 2015. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
"The rise and fall of ISIL explained". Al Jazeera. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
Dale, Daniel (October 24, 2023). "Fact check: Trump falsely claims the US had no terrorist attacks during his presidency". CNN Politics. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
"San Bernardino Mass Shooting - What We Know". ABC7 Los Angeles. December 7, 2015. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
Baldor, Lolita; Burns, Robert (December 10, 2021). "General says US troops to remain in Iraq". Military Times. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
"Timeline of events: 20 years since U.S.-led invasion of Iraq". AP News. March 17, 2023. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
"Statement by the President on the End of the Combat Mission in Afghanistan". whitehouse.gov. December 29, 2014. Archived from the original on January 21, 2017. Retrieved January 18, 2015 – via National Archives.
"Ferguson unrest: From shooting to nationwide protests". BBC News. November 25, 2014. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
Gast, Phil (May 9, 2012). "Obama announces he supports same-sex marriage - CNN Politics". CNN. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
Barnes, Robert (June 26, 2013). "Supreme Court strikes down key part of Defense of Marriage Act". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 12, 2024.
"Supreme Court declares nationwide right to same-sex marriage". AP News. June 26, 2015. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
"Factbox: Donald Trump's legacy - six policy takeaways". Reuters. October 30, 2020. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
"The Latest: Trump promises 'I will not let you down". Associated Press. November 9, 2016. Archived from the original on November 16, 2016. Retrieved November 15, 2016.
Miller, Greg; Entous, Adam. "Declassified report says Putin 'ordered' effort to undermine faith in U.S. election and help Trump". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 7, 2017. Retrieved May 26, 2017.
"Durham report takeaways: A 'seriously flawed' Russia investigation and its lasting impact on the FBI". AP News. May 17, 2023. Retrieved March 23, 2024.
"Mueller Report Doesn't Find Russian Collusion, But Can't 'Exonerate' On Obstruction". NPR. March 24, 2019. Retrieved July 3, 2024.
Diamond, Jeremy (January 28, 2017). "Trump's latest executive order: Banning people from 7 countries and more". CNN Politics. Retrieved March 8, 2021.
"These are the Trump administration policies courts have ruled against". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on February 26, 2021. Retrieved March 8, 2021.
"Trump wall: How much has he actually built?". BBC News. January 21, 2019. Retrieved June 2, 2024.
"Trump built the Supreme Court's conservative majority, but it doesn't always rule in his favor". NBC News. January 3, 2024. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
"A quick guide to the US-China trade war". BBC News. January 16, 2020. Retrieved March 8, 2021.
Gonzales, Richard (June 20, 2018). "Trump's Executive Order On Family Separation: What It Does And Doesn't Do". NPR. Retrieved March 8, 2021.
"Trump admin ran 'pilot program' for zero tolerance at border in 2017". NBC News. June 29, 2018. Retrieved July 3, 2024.
Breuninger, Kevin (September 25, 2019). "Trump asked Ukraine president in phone call 'if you can look into' Biden and his son". CNBC. Retrieved March 8, 2021.
Gilliland, Donald (November 7, 2020). "Biden's defeat of Trump is the most important win since FDR". The Hill. Retrieved December 16, 2020.
"Trump impeachment: The short, medium and long story". BBC News. February 5, 2020. Retrieved March 8, 2021.
"Here's what's driving America's increasing political polarization". NBC News. June 15, 2023. Retrieved June 8, 2024.
"Listening to a divided America". PBS NewsHour. March 8, 2023. Retrieved June 8, 2024.
Owens, Caitlin (August 7, 2023). "America's deepest partisan divides are getting deeper". Axios. Retrieved June 8, 2024.
"Me Too founder Tarana Burke discusses where we go from here". Harvard Gazette. February 21, 2020. Retrieved March 8, 2021.
"Stars accused of sexual harassment and assault". nydailynews.com. August 6, 2020. Retrieved March 8, 2021.
Sancton, Julian (September 29, 2022). "#MeToo Five Years Later: A Timeline of Allegations, Accountability and Activism". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 3, 2024.
Capatosto, Victoria. "A Brief History of Civil Rights in the United States". library.law.howard.edu. Retrieved March 8, 2021.
"White supremacy: Are US right-wing groups on the rise?". BBC News. August 13, 2017. Retrieved June 8, 2024.
"'Throughline': The Rise Of The Modern White Power Movement". NPR. January 25, 2021. Retrieved June 8, 2024.
"Why is white supremacy growing in the United States?". Al Jazeera. Retrieved June 8, 2024.
"Largest Protests in American History". Business Insider. 2018.
Andone, Dakin (March 21, 2018). "What you should know about the March for Our Lives". CNN. Retrieved March 8, 2021.
"March for Our Lives Highlights: Students Protesting Guns Say 'Enough Is Enough'". The New York Times. March 24, 2018. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 8, 2021.
"Toxic: How the search for the origins of COVID-19 turned politically poisonous". AP News. April 22, 2024. Retrieved June 2, 2024.
"The WHO Just Declared Coronavirus COVID-19 a Pandemic". Time. Retrieved March 4, 2022.
McNeil, Donald G. Jr. (March 26, 2020). "The U.S. Now Leads the World in Confirmed Coronavirus Cases". The New York Times. Retrieved March 26, 2022.
Chan C, Shumaker L, Maler S (March 28, 2020). "Confirmed coronavirus cases in U.S. reach 100,000: Reuters tally". Reuters. Retrieved March 28, 2020.
Roberts, Siobhan (March 27, 2020). "Flattening the Coronavirus Curve". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved July 3, 2024.
"U.S. coronavirus deaths top 20,000, highest in world exceeding Italy: Reuters tally". Reuters. April 11, 2020. Retrieved May 1, 2020.
Iorfida, Chris (May 12, 2022). "U.S. surpasses 1 million COVID-19 deaths: A look at the numbers". CBC News. Retrieved June 3, 2022.
Soucheray, Stephanie (February 18, 2021). "Amid COVID-19, US life expectancy sees biggest drop since WWII". CIDRAP. Retrieved March 8, 2021.
McPhillips, Deidre (April 7, 2022). "US life expectancy continues historic decline with another drop in 2021, study finds". CNN. Retrieved June 3, 2022.
Lopez, German (December 14, 2020). "The Covid-19 vaccine's 2 big challenges". Vox. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
"Mapping US cities where George Floyd protests have erupted". aljazeera.com. Retrieved June 26, 2020.
Gottbrath, Laurin-Whitney. "In 2020, the Black Lives Matter movement shook the world". Al Jazeera. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
Brewster, Jack. "Trump Renews Ballot 'Dump' Conspiracy Theory Claim—Here's Why Its Bogus". Forbes. Retrieved March 8, 2021.
"Coronavirus: 'Plandemic' virus conspiracy video spreads across social media". BBC News. May 8, 2020. Retrieved March 8, 2021.
Piper, Jessica (September 4, 2023). "Anti-vaxxers are now a modern political force". Politico. Retrieved May 12, 2024.
"QAnon explained: the antisemitic conspiracy theory gaining traction around the world". The Guardian. August 25, 2020. Retrieved March 8, 2021.
"How QAnon rode the pandemic to new heights — and fueled the viral anti-mask phenomenon". NBC News. August 14, 2020. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
Shepherd, Katie. "Portland police stand by as Proud Boys and far-right militias flash guns and brawl with antifa counterprotesters". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved March 8, 2021.
"Minneapolis mayor calls in National Guard after unrest downtown". NBC News. August 27, 2020. Retrieved March 8, 2021.
Keith, Tamara (December 4, 2020). "Trump Fundraising Surges After Election As He Makes False Claims It Was Rigged". NPR. Retrieved December 16, 2020.
"Trump's false fraud claims are laying groundwork for new voting restrictions, experts warn". NBC News. December 6, 2020. Retrieved December 16, 2020.
"AP Fact Check: Trump's claims of vote rigging are all wrong". The Associated Press. December 3, 2020. Retrieved December 16, 2020.
"Pro-Trump mob storm Capitol as lawmakers meet to certify Biden's win – video". The Guardian. January 6, 2021. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved January 8, 2021.
"Jan. 6 insurrection". The Washington Post. 2021. Retrieved July 6, 2024.
Eastman v Thompson, et al., 8:22-cv-00099-DOC-DFM Document 260, 44 (S.D. Cal. May 28, 2022) ("Dr. Eastman and President Trump launched a campaign to overturn a democratic election, an action unprecedented in American history. Their campaign was not confined to the ivory tower – it was a coup in search of a legal theory. The plan spurred violent attacks on the seat of our nation's government, led to the deaths of several law enforcement officers, and deepened public distrust in our political process... If Dr. Eastman and President Trump's plan had worked, it would have permanently ended the peaceful transition of power, undermining American democracy and the Constitution. If the country does not commit to investigating and pursuing accountability for those responsible, the Court fears January 6 will repeat itself.").
Eisen, Norman; Ayer, Donald; Perry, Joshua; Bookbinder, Noah; Perry, E. Danya (June 6, 2022). Trump on Trial: A Guide to the January 6 Hearings and the Question of Criminality (Report). Brookings Institution. Retrieved December 16, 2023. "[Trump] tried to delegitimize the election results by disseminating a series of far fetched and evidence-free claims of fraud. Meanwhile, with a ring of close confidants, Trump conceived and implemented unprecedented schemes to – in his own words – "overturn" the election outcome. Among the results of this "Big Lie" campaign were the terrible events of January 6, 2021 – an inflection point in what we now understand was nothing less than an attempted coup."
Multiple media sources:

    Graham, David A. (January 6, 2021). "This Is a Coup". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on January 6, 2021. Retrieved December 16, 2023.
    Musgrave, Paul (January 6, 2021). "This Is a Coup. Why Were Experts So Reluctant to See It Coming?". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on January 6, 2021. Retrieved December 16, 2023.
    Solnit, Rebecca (January 6, 2021). "Call it what it was: a coup attempt". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 7, 2021. Retrieved December 16, 2023.
    Coleman, Justine (January 6, 2021). "GOP lawmaker on violence at Capitol: 'This is a coup attempt'". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 6, 2021. Retrieved December 16, 2023.
    Jacobson, Louis (January 6, 2021). "Is this a coup? Here's some history and context to help you decide". PolitiFact. Retrieved January 7, 2021. "A good case can be made that the storming of the Capitol qualifies as a coup. It's especially so because the rioters entered at precisely the moment when the incumbent's loss was to be formally sealed, and they succeeded in stopping the count."
    Barry, Dan; Frenkel, Sheera (January 7, 2021). "'Be There. Will Be Wild!': Trump All but Circled the Date". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved December 16, 2023.
    Duignan, Brian (August 4, 2021). "January 6 U.S. Capitol attack". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on January 17, 2023. Retrieved September 22, 2021. "Because its object was to prevent a legitimate president-elect from assuming office, the attack was widely regarded as an insurrection or attempted coup d'état."

DeBonis, Mike; Kim, Seung Min. "House impeaches Trump with 10 Republicans joining, but Senate plans unclear". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved January 14, 2021.
Fink, Jenni (January 13, 2021). "Donald Trump becomes first president to get impeached twice, losing stranglehold on GOP". Newsweek. Retrieved January 14, 2021.
Gambino, Lauren (January 13, 2021). "Donald Trump impeached a second time over mob attack on US Capitol". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved January 14, 2021.
Herb, Jeremy; Raju, Manu; Barrett, Ted; Fox, Lauren (February 13, 2021). "Trump acquitted for second time following historic Senate impeachment trial". CNN. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
"U.S. Senate: U.S. Senate Roll Call Votes 117th Congress – 1st Session". senate.gov. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
Lerer, Lisa; Ember, Sydney (November 7, 2020). "Kamala Harris Makes History as First Woman and Woman of Color as Vice President". The New York Times. Retrieved July 15, 2022.
"EXPLAINER: Dueling views remain a year after Afghan pullout". AP News. August 17, 2022. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
"Taliban marks two years since return to power in Afghanistan". Al Jazeera. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
Knutson, Jacob (August 20, 2021). "Trump officials back away from 2020 Taliban peace deal after withdrawal chaos". Axios. Retrieved May 12, 2024.
Segers, Grace (March 12, 2021). "Biden signs $1.9 trillion American Rescue Plan into law". CBS News. Retrieved July 5, 2021.
"Who lost Biden's agenda? Democrats offer competing theories for failure of 'Build Back Better'". NBC News. April 17, 2022. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
Shalal, Andrea; Holland, Steve (November 16, 2021). "Biden signs $1 trillion infrastructure bill into law". Reuters. Retrieved November 16, 2021.
"Biden signs bipartisan gun safety package into law". ABC News. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
Judd, Donald; Vazquez, Maegan (August 16, 2022). "Biden signs Inflation Reduction Act into law - CNN Politics". CNN. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
"Honoring our 'PACT' to veterans". Yahoo News. August 8, 2023. Retrieved June 2, 2024.
"30 Things Joe Biden Did as President You Might Have Missed". Politico. February 2, 2024. Retrieved June 1, 2024.
"Schools grapple with thousands in isolation or quarantine as delta variant rages". NBC News. September 4, 2021. Retrieved July 6, 2024.
Anthes, Emily (June 22, 2021). "The Delta Variant: What Scientists Know". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved July 6, 2024.
Tebor, Celina (July 2, 2021). "Delta variant causes new lockdowns and coronavirus restrictions across the globe". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 6, 2024.
Barnes, Julian E.; Cooper, Helene (March 16, 2022). "U.S. Sends More Anti-Aircraft Systems, Drones and Weapons to Ukraine". The New York Times.
Cooper, Helene (July 8, 2022). "How the U.S. Is Arming Ukraine Against Russia". The New York Times.
"U.S. Military Aid to Ukraine Tops $40 Billion". BBC News. July 20, 2023.
"Over 120 Bills Restricting LGBTQ Rights Introduced Nationwide in 2023 So Far". ACLU. Retrieved March 7, 2023.
Liptak, Adam (June 24, 2022). "In 6-to-3 Ruling, Supreme Court Ends Nearly 50 Years of Abortion Rights". The New York Times. Washington, D.C. ISSN 1553-8095. OCLC 1645522. Archived from the original on June 25, 2022. Retrieved June 25, 2022.
Almasy, Steve (June 24, 2022). "Protests underway in cities from Washington to Los Angeles in wake of Supreme Court abortion decision". CNN. Archived from the original on June 25, 2022. Retrieved June 25, 2022.
Tapper, Jake; de Vogue, Ariane; Zeleny, Jeff; Klein, Betsy; Vazquez, Maegan (February 25, 2022). "Biden nominates Ketanji Brown Jackson to be first Black woman to sit on Supreme Court". CNN. Archived from the original on February 28, 2022. Retrieved February 28, 2022.
Graham, David A. (May 8, 2024). "The Cases Against Trump: A Guide". The Atlantic. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
Thomson-DeVeaux, Amelia (August 2, 2023). "All Of Trump's Indictments Could Seriously Bog Down His Campaign". FiveThirtyEight. Retrieved June 8, 2024.
"Americans' views divided on US policy toward Israel-Hamas war: POLL". ABC News. Retrieved July 25, 2024.
"What is U.S.-led Red Sea coalition and which countries are backing it?". Reuters. December 22, 2023. Archived from the original on December 25, 2023. Retrieved May 13, 2024.
"Jury finds former President Trump guilty of all 34 felony counts of falsifying business records". NBC News. Retrieved June 2, 2024.
"Justices rule Trump has some immunity from prosecution". SCOTUSblog. July 1, 2024. Retrieved July 3, 2024.
Wolf, Zachary B. (July 1, 2024). "Analysis: The Supreme Court just gave presidents a superpower. Here's its explanation - CNN Politics". CNN. Retrieved July 3, 2024.
"The meaning of Donald Trump's Supreme Court victory". The Economist. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved July 3, 2024.
Stein, Chris (July 21, 2024). "Joe Biden endorses Kamala Harris to replace him as Democrats begin to throw support behind vice-president – live". the Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved July 21, 2024.
Lybrand, Holmes (September 30, 2024). "Man accused of second attempted Trump assassination pleads not guilty | CNN Politics". CNN. Retrieved November 26, 2024.
Cochran, Lexi Lonas (November 8, 2024). "Trump joins Grover Cleveland with rarest presidential feat". The Hill. Retrieved November 21, 2024.
"Trump is the oldest person to be elected president: U.S. presidents, by age". The Washington Post. November 8, 2024. Retrieved November 21, 2024.
"Biden, in farewell address, warns about dangers of unchecked power in wealthy". ABC News. Retrieved January 16, 2025.
Mascaro, Lisa; Jalonick, Mary Clare; Amiri, Farnoush; Brown, Matt (January 6, 2025). "Congress certifies Trump's 2024 win, without the Jan. 6 mob violence of four years ago". AP News. Retrieved January 13, 2025.
"How many executive orders has Trump signed in 2025?: A look at the president's first month back in office". NBC New York. February 20, 2025. Retrieved March 22, 2025.

    Lee, Matthew (March 11, 2025). "US resumes military aid and intelligence sharing as Ukraine says it is open to a 30-day ceasefire". The Associated Press. Retrieved March 14, 2025.

Sources

    "Lesson Plan on "What Made George Washington a Good Military Leader?"". Archived from the original on June 11, 2011.
    "Outline of American History – Chapter 1: Early America". usa.usembassy.de. Archived from the original on November 20, 2016. Retrieved September 27, 2019.
    Beard, Charles A.; Beard, Mary Ritter; Jones, Wilfred (1927). The Rise of American civilization. Macmillan.
    Chenault, Mark; Ahlstrom, Rick; Motsinger, Tom (1993). In the Shadow of South Mountain: The Pre-Classic Hohokam of 'La Ciudad de los Hornos', Part I and II.
    Coffman, Edward M. (1998). The War to End All Wars: The American Military Experience in World War I.
    Cogliano, Francis D. (2009). Revolutionary America, 1763–1815: A Political History (2nd ed.). Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-96486-9.
    Cooper, John Milton (2001). Breaking the Heart of the World: Woodrow Wilson and the Fight for the League of Nations. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521807869.
    Corbett, P. Scott; Janssen, Volker; Lund, John M.; Pfannestiel, Todd; Waskiewicz, Sylvie; Vickery, Paul (June 26, 2020). "3.3 English settlements in America. The Chesapeake colonies: Virginia and Maryland. The rise of slavery in the Chesapeake Bay Colonies". U.S. history. OpenStax. Archived from the original on August 8, 2020. Retrieved August 8, 2020.
    Dangerfield, George (1963). The Era of Good Feelings: America Comes of Age in the Period of Monroe and Adams Between the War of 1812, and the Ascendancy of Jackson.
    Day, A. Grove (1940). Coronado's Quest: The Discovery of the Southwestern States. Archived from the original on July 26, 2012.
    Gaddis, John Lewis (2005). The Cold War: A New History.
    Gaddis, John Lewis (1989). The Long Peace: Inquiries Into the History of the Cold War.
    Gaddis, John Lewis (1972). The United States and the Origins of the Cold War, 1941–1947. Columbia University Press. ISBN 9780231122399.
    Goodman, Paul. The First American Party System. in Chambers, William Nisbet; Burnham, Walter Dean, eds. (1967). The American Party Systems: Stages of Political Development.
    Greene, John Robert (1995). The Presidency of Gerald R. Ford.
    Greene, Jack P. & Pole, J. R., eds. (2003). A Companion to the American Revolution (2nd ed.). Wiley. ISBN 9781405116749.
    Guelzo, Allen C. (2012). "Chapter 3–4". Fateful Lightning: A New History of the Civil War and Reconstruction. Oxford University Press, USA. ISBN 9780199843282.
    Guelzo, Allen C. (2006). Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation: The End of Slavery in America.
    Hamlin, C. H. (1927) The war myth in United States history New York: The Vanguard Press
    Henretta, James A. (2007). "History of Colonial America". Encarta Online Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on September 23, 2009.
    Hine, Robert V.; Faragher, John Mack (2000). The American West: A New Interpretive History. Yale University Press.
    Howe, Daniel Walker (2009). What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of America, 1815–1848. Oxford History of the United States. p. 798. ISBN 9780199726578.
    Jacobs, Jaap (2009). The Colony of New Netherland: A Dutch Settlement in Seventeenth-Century America (2nd ed.). Cornell University Press. Archived from the original on July 29, 2012.
    Jensen, Richard J.; Davidann, Jon Thares; Sugital, Yoneyuki, eds. (2003). Trans-Pacific relations: America, Europe, and Asia in the twentieth century. Greenwood.
    Kennedy, David M. (1999). Freedom from Fear: The American People in Depression and War, 1929–1945. Oxford History of the United States.
    Kennedy, David M.; Cohen, Lizabeth; Bailey, Thomas A. (2002). The American Pageant: A History of the Republic (12th ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 9780618103492.
    McPherson, James M. (February 25, 1988). Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195038637.
    Middleton, Richard; Lombard, Anne (2011). Colonial America: A History to 1763. Wiley. ISBN 9781405190046.
    Milkis, Sidney M.; Mileur, Jerome M., eds. (2002). The New Deal and the Triumph of Liberalism.
    Miller, John C. (1960). The Federalist Era: 1789–1801. Harper & Brothers.
    Norton, Mary Beth; et al. (2011). A People and a Nation, Volume I: to 1877 (9th ed.). Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 9780495916550.
    Ogawa, Dennis M.; Fox, Evarts C. Jr. (1991). Japanese Americans, from Relocation to Redress.
    Patterson, James T. (1997). Grand Expectations: The United States, 1945–1974. Oxford History of the United States.
    Rable, George C. (2007). But There Was No Peace: The Role of Violence in the Politics of Reconstruction.
    Riley, Glenda (2001) [1986]. Inventing the American Woman: An Inclusive History, Volume 1: to 1877 (3rd ed.). ISBN 978-0-88295-957-3.
    Savelle, Max (2005) [1948]. Seeds of Liberty: The Genesis of the American Mind. Kessinger Publishing. pp. 185–190. ISBN 9781419107078.
    Shlaes, Amity (2008). The Forgotten Man: A New History of the Great Depression. New York City, U.S.: HarperPerennial. ISBN 978-0-06-093642-6.
    Stagg, J. C. A. (1983). Mr Madison's War: Politics, Diplomacy and Warfare in the Early American Republic, 1783–1830. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0691047022.
    Stagg, J. C. A. (2012). The War of 1812: Conflict for a Continent. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-89820-1.
    Stannard, David E. (1993). American Holocaust: The Conquest of the New World. Oxford University Press, USA. ISBN 978-0-19-508557-0.
    Stanley, Peter W. (1974). A Nation in the Making: The Philippines and the United States, 1899–1921. pp. 269–272.
    Thornton, Russell (1991). "The Demography of the Trail of Tears Period: A New Estimate of Cherokee Population Losses". In Anderson, William L. (ed.). Cherokee Removal: Before and After.
    Tooker, Elisabeth (1990). "The United States Constitution and the Iroquois League". In Clifton, J. A. (ed.). The Invented Indian: Cultural Fictions and Government Policies. Transaction Publishers. pp. 107–128. ISBN 9781560007456. Retrieved November 24, 2010.
    van Dijk, Ruud; et al. (2013). Encyclopedia of the Cold War. Routledge. pp. 863–864. ISBN 9781135923112.
    Vann Woodward, C. (1974). The Strange Career of Jim Crow (3rd ed.).
    Wilentz, Sean (2008). The Age of Reagan: A History, 1974–2008. Harper. ISBN 9780060744809.
    Wood, Gordon S. (2009). Empire of Liberty: A History of the Early Republic, 1789–1815. Oxford History of the United States. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195039146.
    Zinn, Howard (2003). A People's History of the United States. HarperPerennial Modern Classics. ISBN 9780060528423.
    Zophy, Angela Howard, ed. (2000). Handbook of American Women's History (2nd ed.). Garland. ISBN 9780824087449.
    Catherine Locks, Sarah Mergel, Pamela Roseman, Tamara Spike & Marie Lasseter. History in the Making: A History of the People of the United States of America to 1877 // Dahlonega, Georgia : The University Press of North Georgia — 2013. ISBN: 978-0-9882237-3-8

External links
History of the United States
at Wikipedia's sister projects

    Definitions from Wiktionary
    Media from Commons
    News from Wikinews
    Quotations from Wikiquote
    Texts from Wikisource
    Textbooks from Wikibooks
    Resources from Wikiversity

    "Encyclopedia of American Studies".
    "US History map animation". Houston Institute for Culture. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved July 24, 2011.
    "Edsitement, History & Social Studies". National Endowment for the Humanities. Archived from the original on August 26, 2013.
    "The Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History".
    "BackStory"., American history public radio show hosted by Ed Ayers, Brian Balogh, and Peter Onuf

    vte

History of the United States by polity
	

	
	

	

    vte

History of the United States

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	
	

	

	

    vte

United States 
	
	

	

	

	

	
	
	

	

	

	

	



	
	

	

	

	

	

	
	

	

	

	

	

	

	
	

	

	

	

    vte

History of North America
	


	

    vte

History of the World
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
	

	

Category:

    History of the United States

    This page was last edited on 14 October 2025, at 20:04 (UTC).
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Code of Conduct
    Developers
    Statistics
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view

    Wikimedia Foundation
    Powered by MediaWiki

